 
 
 
1 
LICENSING AND SUPERVISION OF BANKING BUSINESS 
ASSET CLASSIFICATION AND PROVISIONING DIRECTIVE NO. SBB/90/2024 
Whereas, loans or advances shall be regularly reviewed and classified in a manner 
consistent with accepted principles of international accounting- and regulatory 
standards;  
Whereas, exposures, which are not performing in accordance with contractual 
repayment terms shall be recognized and reported in a manner consistent with 
international accounting- and regulatory standards; 
Whereas, the National Bank intends to adopt an adequate legal framework that 
protects banks from overstating profits by accruing uncollected interest on loans or 
advances, which are classified as not performing; 
Whereas, timely and accurate provisions and write-off shall reflect realistic repayment 
and recovery expectations and, in accordance with International Financial Reporting 
Standards (IFRS), shall include appropriate expectations about future events based on 
reasonable and supportable information to accurately reflect expected credit losses;  
Whereas, the National Bank has to give consistent direction to banks on the manner 
of exposure classification and provisioning; 
Now, therefore, in accordance with Article 21(1c), 21(2) and 66(2) of Banking Business 
Proclamation No. 592/2008 (as Amended by Proclamation No. 1159/2019), the 
National Bank of Ethiopia has issued this Directive. 
1. Short Title  
This Directive may be cited as “Asset Classification and Provisioning Directive No. 
SBB/90/2024”. 
2. Definitions 
For the purpose of this Directive, unless the context provides otherwise: 
 
2.1 
“Bank” means a private or state-owned entity, licensed by the National Bank to 
undertake banking business. 
2.2 “Capitalized Interest” means any accrued and uncollected interest that has 
been added to the principal amount of loans or advances at a payment date or 
maturity; it also includes uncollected interest that is rolled-over into new loans 
or advances. 
 
 
 
2 
2.3 “Cash Collateral” means credit balances on accounts in the books of the 
lending bank over which customers have given the lending bank a formal letter 
of cession and which the bank, at its discretion, has transferred from the 
customer’s account(s) to a specific or general cash collateral account(s) or 
blocked. 
2.4 “Cash Margin” means a specified part (amount) of a transaction value that an 
importer is required to deposit with a bank before the opening of a letter of 
credit by the bank. 
2.5 “Cash-substitutes” means security that include: 
2.5.1 a security issued by the Federal Government of Ethiopia; 
2.5.2 an unconditional obligation or guarantee issued in writing by the Federal 
Government of Ethiopia; 
2.5.3 an unconditional obligation or guarantee issued in writing by a foreign 
bank or a foreign insurance company, with an A or above rating by 
Standard and Poor’s Corporation and/or by Moody’s Investor Services 
or other rating agencies accepted by the National Bank, in their latest 
ratings; 
2.5.4 export credit guarantee issued in writing by an institution or agency 
authorized by the Federal Government of Ethiopia; and 
2.5.5 other liquid and readily marketable securities, approved in writing by the 
National Bank and which are held in the vault of the lending bank. 
2.6 “Counterparty” shall mean any natural or legal person to which a bank has an 
exposure. 
2.7 “Credit Impaired” means when a financial asset is in a state where one or more 
events that have a detrimental impact on the estimated future cash flows of that 
financial asset has occurred (Annex I). 
2.8 “Credit Loss” means the present value of the difference between the 
contractual cash flows that are due to a bank under the contract and the cash 
flows that the bank expects to receive. 
2.9 “Current” as used in reference to “current written,” or similar uses, means 
information or documentation having an issuance date not more than twelve 
(12) calendar months old. 
2.10 “Defaulted Exposure” means an exposure that is past due for more than ninety 
(90) days or an exposure to a defaulted borrower, including exposures to loans 
and advances without pre-established repayment schedule. 
2.11 “Defaulted Borrower” means a borrower with any of the following 
circumstances: 
2.11.1 any credit obligation that is past due for more than ninety (90) days;  
2.11.2 overdrafts shall be deemed past due once the customer has breached 
an advised limit or been advised of a limit smaller than current 
 
 
 
3 
outstanding balance, and shall consider swing or frequency of credit 
balance and scale of utilization; 
2.11.3 any credit obligation in non-accrual status, such as where the lending 
bank no longer recognizes accrued interest as income or, if recognized, 
makes an equivalent amount of provisions; 
2.11.4 a write-off or account-specific provision is made as a result of a 
significant perceived decline in credit quality subsequent to the bank 
taking on any credit exposure to the borrower; 
2.11.5 any credit obligation is sold at a material credit-related economic loss; 
2.11.6  a distressed restructuring of any credit obligation that may result in a 
diminished financial obligation, caused by the material forgiveness, or 
postponement, of principal, interest or (where applicable, fees) is agreed 
by the bank; 
2.11.7 the borrower’s bankruptcy or a similar order in respect of any of the 
borrower’s credit obligations to the bank has been filed; 
2.11.8 the borrower has sought or has been placed in bankruptcy or similar 
protection where this would avoid or delay repayment of any of the 
credit obligations to the bank; or 
2.11.9 any other situation where the bank considers that the borrower is 
unlikely to pay its credit obligations in full without recourse by the bank 
to actions such as realizing security. 
2.12 “Exposure” means either on-balance sheet items, including loan and advance, 
and/or off-balance sheet items such as letters of guarantee, letter of credit, 
commitment by a bank to advance loans to customers. 
2.13 “Expected Credit Loss (ECL)” means the weighted average of credit losses 
with the respective risks of a default representing the weights. A bank shall 
measure ECL in a way that reflects: 
2.13.1 an unbiased and probability-weighted amount that is determined by 
evaluating a range of possible outcomes; 
2.13.2 
the time value of money; and 
2.13.3 
reasonable and supportable information that is available without undue 
cost or effort at the reporting date about past events, current conditions 
and forecasts of future economic conditions. 
2.14 “Forbearance-restructure” occurs when (Annex I):  
2.14.1 a counterparty is experiencing financial difficulty in meeting its financial 
commitments; and 
2.14.2 
a bank grants a concession that it would not otherwise consider. 
2.15 “Guarantee” means a written assurance made by a bank to a person to cover 
an agreed amount if another person fails to meet his obligation. 
 
 
 
 
4 
2.16 “In Process of Collection” means that the collection of loans or advances is 
proceeding in due course, in a timely manner, through enforcement of 
judgments against the borrower that is reasonably assured to result in full or 
partial repayment of the loan or advance (principal plus accrued interest), within 
three-hundred-sixty (360) days from the date the loan or advance first became 
past due. 
2.17 “Interest Free Bank” means a bank licensed by the National Bank to engage 
in interest free banking services. 
2.18 “Interest Free Banking Service” means provision of banking service in 
compliance with Shari’ah principles, including non-acceptance of interest. 
2.19 “Letter of Credit” means a contractual commitment by a bank, at the request 
of an importer, to pay a seller (exporter) a certain amount of money once the 
exporter ships the goods and specified documents are presented as proof of 
the supply of goods within specific time limits and the documents confirming to 
the terms and conditions agreed by the importer and the exporter. 
2.20 “Loan Workout” means a process of forbearance-restructure, between the 
bank and a borrower, to normalize repayment of problem loans and advances. 
2.21 “Loan” or “Advance” means any financial asset of a bank arising from a direct 
or indirect advance, such as, unplanned overdraft, participation in loan 
syndication, the purchase of a loan from another lender, and similar 
transactions to a person that are conditioned on the obligation of the person to 
repay the funds, either on a specified date or dates or on demand, usually with 
interest or through interest-free finance.  
2.22 “Long-term Loan” means a loan or an advance with repayment or maturity 
period of more than five (5) years; 
2.23 “Medium-term Loan” means a loan or an advance with repayment or maturity 
period of more than one (1) but less than or equal to five (5) years; 
2.24 “National Bank” means National Bank of Ethiopia; 
2.25 “Net Recoverable Value” means the most probable value of a loan or an 
advance, which will be realized from the sale of collateral securing the loan or 
advance in a competitive and open market. For purposes of this Directive, the 
most probable value of a loan or an advance recoverable from the sale of 
collateral securing the loan or advance shall be the outstanding principal 
balance of the loan or advance multiplied by the “average recovery rate” of a 
bank for loans or advances secured by collateral, provided that such average 
recovery rate shall not be fifteen (15) percentage points greater than “industry 
average recovery rate”. If a bank has no information on aggregate net cash 
receipts or total net market value of acquired properties to compute its own 
average recovery rate, it shall use industry average recovery rate to determine 
the most probable value of a loan or an advance.  
 
 
 
5 
2.25.1 
“Average Recovery Rate” means aggregate net cash receipts from sale 
of collateral plus total net market value of acquired properties, divided 
by the aggregate outstanding principal balance of the loans or advances 
backed by the collateral sold or otherwise acquired by a bank calculated 
over the period of 18 consecutive months preceding the date of 
computing minimum provision requirement as laid down in this 
Directive. In case a loan or an advance is secured by more than one 
collateral, such loan or advance and the collateral securing it shall be 
excluded from computation of average recovery rate unless all 
properties backing the loan or advance are sold or otherwise acquired 
by the bank.  
2.25.2 “Aggregate Net Cash Receipts” means net cash collection (after 
deduction of any expenses associated with the sale of the collateral, 
which may have been necessary to place the collateral in a saleable 
condition), over eighteen (18) consecutive months preceding the date of 
calculating minimum provision requirement, of a bank from the sale of 
collateral, which have been seized or foreclosed by the bank in 
satisfaction of loans or advances previously granted.  
2.25.3 “Total Net Market Value of Acquired Properties” means the average 
of ask or reserve price of acquired properties and the highest offer bid 
amount registered at the last auction in the market that preceded the 
acquisition by a bank for properties which, previously were offered by 
borrowers as collateral against loans or advances. The highest offer bid 
amount for auctioned property in absence of a bidder at the last auction 
shall be zero.  
2.25.4 “Ask or Reserve Price” means minimum price at which the lending 
bank is willing to sell foreclosed assets. 
2.25.5 “Industry Average Recovery Rate” means aggregate net cash 
receipts plus total net market value of acquired properties, divided by 
the aggregate outstanding principal balance of the loans or advances, 
backed by the collateral at the time the collateral was seized, foreclosed, 
repossessed or otherwise acquired by all banks operating in Ethiopia 
calculated over the period of eighteen (18) consecutive months 
preceding the date of determining minimum provision requirement. In 
case a loan or an advance is secured by more than one collateral, such 
loan or advance and collateral backing it, shall be excluded from 
computation of industry average recovery rate, unless all properties held 
as collateral against the loan or advance are sold or otherwise acquired 
by banks. The National Bank shall compute such industry average 
recovery rate every calendar quarter and distribute to all banks 
operating in Ethiopia.  
 
 
 
6 
2.25.6 In determining the average recovery rate as set out under 2.25.1 herein 
above, the net market value of acquired property and/or the net cash 
receipt from the sale of collateral shall not exceed 100% of each 
outstanding non-performing loan backed by the collateral and used in 
the calculation of the average recovery rate. 
2.26 “Non-accrual Status” means that a loan or an advance has been placed on a 
cash basis for financial reporting purposes. Interest on such loans or advances 
accrued on the books of the bank, or for which a specific reserve (such as a 
suspended interest account) has been established by the bank to offset the full 
amount of interest being accrued, shall not be taken into income. 
2.27 “Non-performing Exposures” means:  
2.27.1 “defaulted exposures”; or 
2.27.2 exposures that are “credit-impaired” (in the meaning of exposures 
having experienced a downward adjustment to their valuation due to 
deterioration of their creditworthiness) according to IFRS;    
2.27.3 all other exposures that are not defaulted or impaired but nevertheless: 
are exposures that are more than ninety (90) days past due; or where 
there is evidence that full repayment based on the contractual terms, 
original or, when applicable, modified including repayment of principal 
and interest is unlikely without the bank’s realization of collateral, 
whether or not the exposure is current and regardless of the number of 
days the exposure is past due; 
2.27.4 exposures that have been classified as sub-standard, doubtful or loss, 
in accordance with this Directive, and such classification shall not take 
collateral into account;  
2.27.5 for purposes of this Directive, overdrafts and loans or advances that do 
not have a pre-established repayment program shall be non-
performing when:  
a) the debt remains outstanding for ninety (90) consecutive days or 
more beyond the scheduled payment date or maturity;  
b) the debt exceeds the borrower’s approved limit for ninety (90) 
consecutive days or more;  
c) interest is due and uncollected for ninety (90) consecutive days or 
more, for overdrafts;  
d) the account has been inactive for ninety (90) consecutive days or  
e) deposits are insufficient to cover the interest capitalized during ninety 
(90) consecutive days or  
f) the account shows five percent (5%) or less debit balance at least 
once over three hundred and sixty (360) days preceding the loan 
review period, which shall be end of every calendar quarter. 
 
 
 
7 
2.27.6 For purposes of this Directive, the entire principal balance of exposures 
outstanding, exhibiting the characteristics described under 2.27.1 to 
2.27.5, shall be considered as non-performing. 
2.28 “Overdraft” means a current account on the books of a bank with a debit 
balance. 
2.29 “Off-balance Sheet Item” means commitment to advance loans, undrawn 
credit commitment, revocable or irrevocable documentary letters of credit, 
standby letters of credit, and guarantees issued on behalf of a borrower. 
2.30 “Past Due” means an exposure where any amount due under the contract 
including interest, principal, fee, or other amount has not been paid in full at the 
date when it was due. 
2.31 “Provisions for Loan Losses Account” means a balance sheet valuation 
account, established through charges to provision expense in the income 
statement, in respect of expected credit losses in the loans or advances portfolio 
or off-balance sheet exposures. 
2.32 “Short-term Loan” means a loan or an advance with repayment or maturity 
period of one (1) year or less. 
2.33 “Significant Increase of Credit Risk” means the difference between: the risk 
of a default occurring at the reporting date based on the modified contractual 
terms; and the risk of a default occurring at initial recognition based on the 
original, unmodified contractual terms. Unless proven otherwise, it is deemed 
that the credit risk on a financial asset has increased significantly since initial 
recognition when contractual payments are more than thirty (30) days past due 
(Annex I). 
2.34 “Suspended Interest Account” means an account where previously accrued 
but uncollected interest on loans or advances required to be placed on non-
accrual status is reserved out of the income of the bank. 
2.35 “Valuer” means a person who estimates the value of a property, based on 
professional and accepted standards and methods, and includes internal valuer 
of a bank or external valuer. 
2.36 “Total Capital” shall mean the paid-up capital, legal reserve and any other 
unencumbered reserve held by a bank and approved by the National Bank; and 
2.37 “Write-off” means reduction of the gross carrying amount of a loan or financial 
asset when the bank has no reasonable expectations of recovering the contract 
cash flow in its entirety or a portion thereof. 
3. Scope of the Directive 
This Directive shall be applicable to commercial banks operating in Ethiopia. 
 
 
 
 
8 
4. Responsibility for Loan Review and Specific Requirements 
 
4.1 
The board of directors of each bank shall establish policies for grading, 
classifying, and monitoring all credit exposures, including off-balance 
sheet and restructured exposures, as well as, identifying and managing 
problem assets.  
4.2  A loan review system shall: 
4.2.1 establish processes and methodologies for grading, classifying, and 
monitoring all credit exposures, including off-balance sheet and 
restructured exposures; 
4.2.2 recognize accurately and timely, the problem of deteriorating loans or 
advances; 
4.2.3 assure the adequacy of the provision for expected credit losses and 
write- off of uncollectible loans; and 
4.2.4 ensure that the borrowers are using loans or advances and overdraft 
facilities for the purposes(s) they negotiated with the bank; and in case 
of diversion from the intended purpose(s), timely measures are taken to 
correct the problem. 
4.3 The board of directors of each bank shall ensure that a review is made of the 
quality of the bank’s loans or advances portfolio on a regular basis, but no less 
than once each calendar quarter. At the end of each calendar quarter, or more 
frequently, if warranted, the board of directors shall require the executive 
officer(s) of the bank to take appropriate measures in response to the findings 
of the loans review function, to:   
4.3.1 accurately reflect earnings by assuring that all loans or advances 
categorized as non-performing in accordance with the requirements laid 
out in this Directive are placed on non-accrual status and accrued but 
uncollected interest has been reversed out of the bank’s income; 
4.3.2 assure that the provisions and write-off for expected credit losses are 
adequate, and reflect realistic repayment and recovery expectations 
and, where relevant, include appropriate expectations about future 
events based on reasonable and supportable information in accordance 
with international financial reporting standards; and  
4.3.3 correct problems, either in individual loans or advances, loan 
underwriting practices, compliance with prudent lending standards and 
the board-approved lending policy, or other credit administration 
weaknesses as may be identified by the loan review function, within a 
specified time frame. 
4.4 The board of directors of each bank shall maintain adequate records supporting 
its evaluation of expected credit losses in the loans or advances portfolio and 
the entries made to reflect earnings and the adequacy of the provisions for 
 
 
 
9 
expected credit losses; such records shall be made available to examiners of 
the National Bank upon request. 
4.5 The loan review function shall ensure, that:  
4.5.1 lending activities are in compliance with prudent written lending 
standards, as approved and adopted by the board of directors; 
4.5.2 the borrowers are using loans or advances and overdraft facilities for the 
purposes(s) they negotiated with the bank; and in case of diversion from 
the intended purpose(s), timely measures are taken to correct the 
problem; 
4.5.3 the board of directors is adequately informed of the risks and potential 
loss exposure in outstanding loans or advances; 
4.5.4 problem or deteriorating loans or advances are properly and timely 
identified, classified, and placed on non-accrual status in accordance 
with the requirements laid out in this Directive; 
4.5.5 appropriate provisions and write-off are made for expected credit loss 
in accordance with the requirements laid out in this Directive; and  
4.5.6 uncollectible non-performing loans or advances are written-off as 
appropriate. 
4.6 The loan review function shall regularly, and on an on-going basis, review all 
loans or advances, which are equal to or above five percent (5%) of a bank’s 
total capital to a single counterparty, calculated in accordance with the Large 
Exposures Directive; all loans or advances required to be placed on non-
accrual status in accordance with requirements laid out in this Directive (for 
banks transformed from microfinance institutions, microfinance clients loans 
shall be reviewed on sample basis); and a sample of the remaining loans or 
advances portfolio to determine that:  
4.6.1 loans or advances reflected as performing on the books of the bank are 
in fact performing pursuant to the requirements and definitions laid out 
in this Directive, and 
4.6.2 moreover, for loans below the five percent (5%) threshold that have not 
been placed on non-accrual status, the loan review function shall 
conduct a review at portfolio level, considering loans with homogenous 
characteristic. 
4.7  The loan review function shall be appointed by the board of directors of each 
bank, among a group of individuals who are knowledgeable in credit analysis 
methodologies and who are not involved in the lending activities of the bank. 
The function shall on a regular basis, but not less than once each calendar 
quarter, report its findings directly to the board of directors in writing. 
4.8 Banks, with non-performing exposures to total exposures ratio equal to or 
higher than five percent (5%), shall submit to the National Bank an action plan 
to improve their asset quality. The action plan, approved by the board of 
 
 
 
10 
directors, shall identify time-bound credible and non-performing exposures 
reduction targets, to be achieved with multiple initiatives including 
provisioning, write-off, selling, work out units, restructuring, or foreclosure.  
5. Placement of Loans or Advances on Non-Accrual Status 
 
5.1 
All non-performing loans shall be placed on non-accrual status. 
5.2 Accrued but uncollected interest being carried on the books of a bank for 
loans or advances, which are required to be placed on non-accrual status 
in accordance with the requirements laid out in this Directive, shall be 
eliminated by the end of the calendar quarter in which the loans or 
advances are required to be placed on non-accrual status, but in no event 
later than the fiscal year-end of the bank, whichever is sooner. 
5.3 A non-performing loan or advance placed on non-accrual status, may be 
re-categorized as performing and upgraded to accrual status only when 
all the following criteria are simultaneously met: 
5.3.1 the counterparty has no exposure more than ninety (90) days past 
due; 
5.3.2 in the case of term loans, with monthly or quarterly installment, 
repayments have been made when due over a continuous repayment 
period of at least six (6) and two (2) consecutive repayments, 
respectively; in the case of loans with semi-annual installment, 
repayments have been made for at least two (2) consecutive periods; 
in case of loans with annual installment, repayment has been made 
for at least one (1) period. These repayments have to be either made 
in a consecutive manner (with no upfront repayment) or the stated 
periods shall be observed for the purpose of re-categorization; 
5.3.3 the counterparty’s situation has improved so that the full repayment 
of the exposure is likely, according to the original or, when applicable, 
modified conditions;  
5.3.4 the exposure is not “defaulted” or “impaired”; and 
5.3.5 all accrued interest on the non-performing loan or advance has been 
fully paid. 
5.4 Banks shall report to the National Bank on a quarterly basis loans and 
advances that are restructured; and those that have been restored from 
non-accrual to accrual status: 
5.4.1 for a loan or and advance equal to or above five percent (5%) of a 
bank’s total capital, it shall be reported on individual basis; and  
5.4.2 for all loans and advances, it shall be reported at the aggregate level, 
including the loans and advances stated under sub-article 5.4.1 
hereinabove.  
 
 
 
11 
5.5 If a bank has multiple loans outstanding to a single borrower as calculated 
in accordance with the Single Borrower Loan Limit, and one loan or 
advance, which accounts for at least 20% of the borrower’s total loans 
with the bank, meets the criteria for non-performing loan, then all other 
loans or advances to the borrower shall automatically be placed on non-
performing status, regardless of any requirements laid out in this 
Directive.  
6. Classification of Exposures 
 
6.1 
For purposes of this Directive, banks shall classify all exposures, whether 
the exposures have pre-established repayment programs or not, into the 
following five classification categories using the criteria described below: 
 
6.1.1 
Pass  
Any exposures, for which there has not been significant increase in 
credit risk (Annex I) since initial recognition shall be classified under 
this category. Exposures in this category are fully protected by the 
current financial and paying capacity of the borrower and are not 
subject to criticism.  
 
6.1.2 Special Mention  
Special Mention are exposures for which there has been a significant 
increase in credit risk (Annex I). The special mention exposures may 
include, but not limited to, the following: 
a) exposures with pre-established repayment programs past due thirty (30) 
days or more, but less than ninety (90) days; 
b) exposures that do not have a pre-established repayment program, if: 
i. the debt remains outstanding for thirty (30) consecutive days or more 
beyond the scheduled payment date or maturity, but less than ninety 
(90) days; or 
ii. the debt exceeds the borrower’s approved limit for thirty (30) 
consecutive days or more, but less than ninety (90) days; or  
iii. interest is due and uncollected for thirty (30) consecutive days or 
more; but less than ninety (90) days; or  
iv. for overdrafts, the account has been inactive for thirty (30) 
consecutive days or more, but less than ninety (90) days or the 
account shows a debit balance of one to four percent (1% to 4%) of 
the approved limit at least once over three hundred sixty (360) days 
preceding the loan review period, which shall be end of every 
calendar quarter. 
 
 
 
12 
 
6.1.3 Sub-standard  
Without prejudice to the classification criteria, the following non-
performing exposures, at a minimum, shall be considered sub-
standard: 
a) exposures with pre-established repayment programs past due ninety 
(90) days or more, but less than one hundred eighty (180) days; 
b) exposures including overdrafts that do not have a pre-established 
repayment program, if: 
i. the debt remains outstanding for ninety (90) consecutive days or 
more beyond the scheduled payment date or maturity, but less than 
one hundred eighty (180) days; or 
ii. the debt exceeds the borrower’s approved limit for ninety (90) 
consecutive days or more, but less than one hundred eighty (180) 
days; or  
iii. interest is due and uncollected for ninety (90) consecutive days or 
more; but less than one hundred eighty (180) days; or  
iv. for overdrafts, the account has been inactive for ninety (90) 
consecutive days or more, but less than one hundred eighty (180) 
days or the account shows debit balance of five to nineteen percent 
(5% to 19%) of the approved limit, at least once over three hundred 
sixty (360) days preceding the loan review period, which shall be end 
of every calendar quarter. 
 
6.1.4 Doubtful  
The following exposures, at a minimum, shall be classified doubtful: 
a) exposures with pre-established repayment programs past due one 
hundred eighty (180) days or more, but less than three hundred sixty 
(360) days; 
b) exposures (including overdrafts) that do not have a pre-established 
repayment program, if: 
i. the debt remains outstanding for one hundred eighty (180) 
consecutive days or more beyond the scheduled payment date or 
maturity, but less than three hundred sixty (360) days; or 
ii. the debt exceeds the borrower’s approved limit for one hundred 
eighty (180) consecutive days or more, but less than three hundred 
sixty (360) days; or  
iii. interest is due and uncollected for one hundred eighty (180) days or 
more, but less than three hundred sixty (360) days; or  
iv. for overdrafts, the account has been inactive for one hundred eighty 
(180) consecutive days or more, but less than three hundred sixty 
 
 
 
13 
(360) days; or the account shows debit balance of twenty to forty-
nine percent (20% to 49%) of the approved limit, at least once over 
three hundred sixty (360) days preceding the loan review period, 
which shall be end of every calendar quarter. 
 
6.1.5 Loss  
The following non-performing loans and advances, at a minimum, 
shall be classified loss: 
a) exposures with pre-established repayment programs past due three 
hundred sixty (360) days or more; 
b) overdrafts and loans or advances that do not have a pre-established 
repayment program, if: 
i. the debt remains outstanding for three hundred sixty (360) 
consecutive days or more; or, 
ii. the debt exceeds the borrower’s approved limit for three hundred 
sixty (360) consecutive days or more; or  
iii. interest is due and uncollected for three hundred sixty (360) days or 
more; or  
iv. for overdrafts, the account has been inactive for three hundred sixty 
(360) consecutive days or more; or the account shows a debit 
balance of fifty percent (50%) and above of the approved limit at 
least once over three hundred sixty (360) days preceding the loan 
review period, which shall be end of every calendar quarter. 
 
6.1.6 Unlikely to pay  
The classification criteria prescribed above for sub-standard, 
doubtful, and loss are based on the objective condition of days past 
due. Nevertheless, a bank shall also consider whether there is 
evidence that full repayment based on the original contractual terms, 
or in case of restructured exposures, modified contractual terms is 
unlikely without the bank’s realization of collateral, regardless of the 
number of days the exposure is past due. In these cases, a bank shall 
classify the exposure accordingly as non-performing. 
 
6.1.7 Forbearance-Restructure Process of Exposures 
a) A bank shall put in place policies and procedures for forbearance- 
restructure. A bank shall carry out its restructure process in a prudent 
way that improves its credit quality. 
b) A bank shall not restructure short- or medium- term loans and 
advances to a borrower for more than three (3) iterations, and long- 
term loans and advances for more than four (4) iterations; the manner 
 
 
 
14 
of collection of interest and/or principal in arrears by the bank and 
issues related to grace period (where applicable) shall also be part of 
the restructuring between the bank and the borrower depending on 
specific circumstances of the loan and capacity of the borrower. 
c) Regardless of sub-Article 8.2 of the National Bank Directive No. 
CRB/01/2019, a bank may extend additional loans and advances to a 
borrower who defaulted from own bank with a view to rehabilitate loans 
and advances. 
d) Non-performing exposures restructured for more than two (2) iterations 
shall automatically be classified at least as sub-standard, and they shall 
be classified as doubtful or loss in line with the criteria indicated under 
sub-articles 6.1.4 and 6.1.5 hereinabove, respectively. 
e) A restructured exposure shall be identified and remain as a 
“restructured exposure”, until it meets both of the following exit criteria: 
i. 
when all payments, as per the revised contractual terms, have been 
made in a timely manner over a continuous repayment period of 
not less than one (1) year for reporting (the starting date of the 
probation period shall be the start of payments under the revised 
terms, regardless of the performing or non-performing status of the 
exposure at the time that restructure was granted); and 
ii. 
the counterparty has resolved its financial difficulty. 
f) Forbearance-restructure may be granted on performing or non-
performing exposures.  
g) Forbearance-restructure shall not be used to circumvent classification 
and provisioning standards. When forbearance is applied to a non-
performing exposure, the exposure shall remain non-performing for at 
least six (6) months. Even if applying forbearance to a performing 
exposure result in a new exposure, the bank shall determine whether 
the exposure satisfies the non-performing criteria. 
6.2 Policies and processes adopted by the bank on classification and 
provisioning shall be subject to scrutiny of the National Bank, whose 
examiners maintain their own discretion when conducting file review.  
6.3 If policies, processes or methodologies are inadequate, or if exposure 
classifications are inaccurate or provisions are deemed to be inadequate 
for prudential purposes (e.g. if the examiner considers existing or 
anticipated deterioration in exposure quality to be of concern, or if the 
provisions do not fully reflect expected credit losses), the examiner has 
the power to take appropriate action.  
6.4 The action includes requiring the bank to:  
6.4.1 revise its policies, processes or methodologies for classification and 
provisioning;  
 
 
 
15 
6.4.2 adjust its classifications of exposures;  
6.4.3 increase its levels of provisioning, reserves or capital; or 
6.4.4 if necessary, impose other remedial measures. 
7. Provisioning Requirements for On-Balance Sheet Exposures 
 
7.1 
All banks shall maintain a Provision for Loan Losses Account, which shall 
be created by charges to provision expense in the profit and loss 
statement and shall be maintained at a level adequate to absorb potential 
losses in the loans or advances portfolio. In determining the adequacy of 
the provisions for Loan Losses Account, provisions may be attributed to 
individual loans or advances or groups of loans or advances. 
7.2 The Provisions for Loan Losses Account shall always have a credit 
balance.  Additions to or reductions of the Provisions for Loan Losses 
Account shall be made only through charges to provisions in the profit 
and loss at least every calendar quarter. 
7.3 Banks shall maintain the following minimum prudential provision 
percentages against the outstanding principal amount of each loan or 
advance, classified in accordance with the criteria for the classification of 
loans or advances as laid out under Article 6 of this Directive: 
 
Classification Category 
Minimum Prudential Provision 
 
7.3.1 
“Pass”                                                                                  
1% 
7.3.2 
“Special Mention”                                                            
3% 
7.3.3 
“Sub-standard”                                                                 
20% 
7.3.4 
“Doubtful”                                                                         
50% 
7.3.5 
“Loss”                                                                                  
100% 
 
7.4 Where reliable information, such as, historical loan loss experience; 
current and forecast of future economic conditions; delinquency trends; 
ineffectiveness of lending policies and/or collection procedures; or lack 
of timeliness and accuracy in the loan review function, suggests that 
losses are likely to be more than the above minimum provision 
percentages, banks may be required to maintain larger provisions. 
7.5 The minimum prudential provision requirements for each classification 
category, under sub-article 7.3 of this article, shall be applied against the 
total outstanding principal balance, not against the amount of past due 
payments, for each loan or advance, or portion thereof, classified 
regardless of whether the loan or advance is analyzed and provided for 
individually or as part of a group. 
 
 
 
16 
7.6 Before applying the minimum provision percentages laid out under sub-
article 7.3 of this article, banks may deduct from the outstanding non-
performing loans or advances: 
7.6.1 any accrued but uncollected interest held in a suspended interest 
account (by debiting this account); and 
7.6.2 in the case of loans secured by physical collateral, net recoverable 
value, or estimated collateral value (where applicable, as per Article 
10 of this Directive) backing the non-performing loan, whichever is 
lower. 
7.7 
Notwithstanding deductions stipulated under sub-article 7.6 of this 
article, minimum provision percentage maintained by a bank for each 
non-performing loan or advance shall not be less than three percent (3%) 
of the outstanding loan or advance. 
8. Provisioning Requirements for Off-balance Sheet Exposures 
 
8.1 
All banks shall maintain a Provision for Loan Losses Account, which shall 
be created by charges to provision expense in the profit and loss 
statement and shall be maintained at a level adequate to absorb potential 
losses from off-balance sheet exposures, including letter of credit (such 
as sight or acceptance letter of credit), guarantee (such as performance 
bond or bid bond guarantees) and commitment to loan or advance. 
8.2 All banks shall maintain the prudential provisions against the total off-
balance sheet exposure (amount of cash margin or value of eligible 
collateral shall not be deducted while computing such exposure value for 
provisioning purposes). 
8.3 Banks shall maintain the following minimum prudential general provision 
percentages against the total off-balance sheet exposure amount:  
8.3.1 Guarantee  
a) Guarantee with no counter guarantee:  2% 
b) Guarantee with counter guarantee by foreign bank or foreign insurance 
company with an A rating as per sub-article 2.5.3 of this Directive: 1% 
8.3.2 Commitment to provide loan and advance:  
2% 
8.3.3 Letter of credit: 2% 
8.3.4 Other off-balance sheet exposures: 2% 
8.4 A bank shall maintain additional provision, over the general provision 
stipulated in sub-article 8.3 of this Article, in the following manner: 
8.4.1 additional 2% on any type of off-balance sheet exposure, where the 
exposure is considered non-performing, in the case of, but not 
limited to: 
 
 
 
17 
a) the bank has cause to believe that it is unlikely to recover, in a timely 
manner, the full amounts it may be required to honor; and   
b) in the case of commitment to advance (undrawn facility), if the 
creditworthiness of the counterparty has deteriorated to an extent that the 
timely repayment in full by the counterparty of any potential drawdown or 
associated interest payments or fees is unlikely.  
8.4.2 additional 5%, in the in case of an off-balance sheet exposure under 
litigation.  
8.5 Banks shall have proper monitoring system to measure and control the 
risks of its off-balance sheet exposures.  
8.6 Banks shall review the adequacy of the provisions for off-balance sheet 
exposures on a continuous basis to ensure that the provisions set aside 
are reflective of their potential losses.  
9. Eligibility of the Collateral 
 
9.1 
A bank shall evaluate the status of collateral on any loans and advances 
classified as at least sub-standard.  
9.2  A bank may initiate procedures, which could include the realization of 
any collateral, once a credit facility becomes non-performing.  
9.3  Collateral that can be considered for the purpose of determining levels 
of provisioning shall be:  
9.3.1 supported by proper legal documentation, binding on all parties 
and legally enforceable. Banks shall conduct sufficient legal review 
to verify this and have a well-founded legal basis to reach this 
conclusion; 
9.3.2 appropriately charged and registered. Banks shall have the right to 
liquidate or take legal possession of the collateral, in a timely 
manner, in the event of the default, insolvency or bankruptcy of the 
counterparty; 
9.3.3 adequately insured; 
9.3.4 valued by a valuer (as per Article 10 of this Directive); 
9.3.5 free of prior liens which could reduce its value or prevent the bank 
from obtaining clear title; and  
9.3.6 characterized by no foreseeable difficulties in actual foreclosure or 
disposing. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
18 
10. Valuation of Physical Collateral  
 
10.1 
When banks use external valuers, they shall establish a list of accepted 
external valuers from the competent authority, ensuring that valuers 
have relevant expertise in the segments of the property sector. 
10.2 
Banks shall ensure that the valuers provide an impartial, clear, 
transparent, and objective valuation, and each valuation shall have a 
final report providing:   
10.2.1 the value of the collateral; 
10.2.2 the approaches, methodology and key parameters and 
assumptions that have been used to assess the value (for example, 
discounting the value to reflect change in market conditions, the 
cost of sale, delay in realizing the proceeds, and liquidation cost); 
10.2.3 a description of the collateral, including its current use or multiple 
uses if applicable, and the property type and quality, including age 
and state of preservation; 
10.2.4 a description of the location of the collateral, the local market 
conditions, and the liquidity;  
10.2.5 the legal and actual attributes of the collateral; and  
10.2.6 any known circumstances that may affect the value in the short-
term. 
10.3 
Banks shall critically review the valuation they receive from the valuer, 
focusing on aspects such as comprehensibility (whether the approaches 
and assumptions are clear and transparent), the prudence of 
assumptions (for example, in regards to cash flow and discount rates), 
and the clear and reasonable identification of comparable properties 
used as a value benchmark. 
10.4 
Banks shall ensure that a valuer carrying out the valuation tasks: 
10.4.1 is professionally competent and/or meets any national or 
international requirements and accepted professional standards 
that apply to the valuer; 
10.4.2 has the appropriate technical skills and experience to perform the 
assignment; 
10.4.3 has the necessary knowledge, that is, knowledge of the subject of 
the valuation, the relevant property market, and the purpose of 
the valuation; and 
10.4.4 is independent from the credit decision-making process. 
10.5 
Banks shall ensure that the fee or the salary of the valuer and the result 
of the valuation are not linked in a way that creates a conflict of interest.  
 
 
 
19 
10.6 
Banks shall assess the performance of the valuers, in particular the 
accuracy of the valuations provided, by back-testing on the value of the 
collateral. 
10.7 
To mitigate any conflict of interest, banks shall take reasonable steps to 
ensure that valuers and their first-degree relatives are: 
10.7.1 not involved in the loan application, assessment, decision or 
administration;  
10.7.2 not guided or influenced by the borrower’s creditworthiness;  
10.7.3 rotated adequately;  
10.7.4 not related to either the buyer or the seller of the property; and 
10.7.5 not conflicted regarding the property in question, both in real 
terms and potentially.  
11. Duty to Use Applicable International Financial Reporting Standard  
 
11.1 
Banks shall calculate expected credit losses in accordance with 
applicable International Financial Reporting Standards. 
11.2 Where the annual (audited financial statements) expected credit losses 
determined using applicable International Financial Reporting Standards, 
are lower than minimum prudential provisions determined as per this 
Directive (under sub-article 7.3), the difference shall be treated as an 
appropriation from retained earnings and placed in a non-distributable 
reserve. 
11.3 Where the annual (audited financial statements) expected credit losses 
determined under applicable International Financial Reporting Standards, 
are higher than those determined as per this Directive (sub-article 7.3), 
they shall be considered adequate for the purpose of this Directive. 
12. Portfolio Composition and Review of Financial Statements of Borrowers  
 
Banks shall review financial statements for the latest financial year of a borrower, 
who has been in business for a year or above, audited by external auditors, before 
granting loans or advances of Birr ten (10) million or above.  
13. Examiner Review 
 
13.1 Each bank shall maintain adequate records in support of its evaluation of 
potential loss exposure in the loans or advances portfolio and of the 
entries made to ensure an adequate Provisions for Loan Losses Account, 
which shall be made available to examining personnel of the National 
Bank upon request, to assess the reasonableness of the bank’s loss 
estimation procedures, the reliability of the information on which 
 
 
 
20 
estimates are based, and the adequacy of the Provisions for Loan Losses 
Account. 
13.2  Should examining personnel in applying the requirements of this 
Directive, and after discussions with the executive officer(s) of the bank, 
find the Provisions for Loan Losses Account to be inadequate by more 
than ten percent (10%) when compared to the findings of an on-site 
examination, the board of directors shall within thirty (30) days of such 
notice by the National Bank of any deficiency in the Provisions for Loan 
Losses Account, require the executive officer(s) to record the appropriate 
entries to increase the balance of the Provisions for Loan Losses Account 
to a level which is within ten percent (10%) of the estimated amount of 
the Provisions for Loan Losses Account determined by examiners of the 
National Bank. 
13.3 In the event of material disagreements between examining personnel of 
the National Bank and the executive officer(s) of the bank regarding the 
appropriateness of additional provisions needed to the Provisions for 
Loan Losses Account, the board of directors may appeal to the National 
Bank. Notwithstanding this appeal, it is incumbent on the executive 
officer(s) of the bank to attend all loan discussions and meetings during 
on-site examination in order to be fully apprised of examiner concerns 
with respect to all classified loans or advances. 
14. Write-off Policy 
 
A bank shall have sound policies and processes to ensure that write-offs of 
identified losses are made in a timely manner.  
15. Other Provisioning or Write-off Requirements 
 
15.1 Expenses for depreciation of fixed assets shall be made out of the annual 
income of a bank in accordance with the relevant law. 
15.2 Operating and accumulated losses shall be provided for from the annual 
net profit until such losses are fully covered. 
15.3 
The value of any assets lodged or pledged to secure a liability, as 
indicated under Article 21(1)(b) of Proclamation No. 592/2008(as 
Amended by Proclamation 1159/2019), shall be fully provided for upon 
the lodging or pledging of any asset. 
15.4 Preliminary expenses, representing expenses relating to organization or 
extension or the purchase of business or good, will and including share-
underwriting commission shall be amortized fully within five (5) years. 
 
 
 
 
21 
15.5 Any uncollectible claims, other than loans or advances, shall be classified 
and provided for in the same manner and method laid down in this 
Directive for term loans with monthly repayment program or otherwise 
written-off as other operating expense of the bank as they are identified. 
16. Interpretation of the Directive  
All exposures held by a bank shall be accounted for and categorized in accordance 
with the requirements laid out in this Directive. No interpretation of this Directive 
shall be permitted unless confirmed in writing by the National Bank.  In recording 
an exposure not covered in principle by the requirements laid out in this Directive, 
a bank shall make a written request to the National Bank to confirm the proper 
application of the requirements laid out in this Directive. 
17. Reporting 
 
17.1 Banks shall submit, to the Banking Supervision Directorate of the National 
Bank, as per the templates attached herein, which shall be part of this 
Directive, quarterly reports on:  
17.1.1 on loan and advances classification and provisioning; and  
17.1.2 provisioning for off-balance sheet exposures.  
17.2 Banks shall also submit, to the Banking Supervision Directorate of the 
National Bank, as per the templates attached herein and as per sub-
article 5.4 of this Directive, quarterly reports on:   
17.2.1 restructured loans and advances; and  
17.2.2 loans and advances re-categorized from non-accrual to accrual 
status. 
18. Interest Free Financing 
Banks engaging in interest-free banking business shall consider margin/profit, in 
place of interest stipulated in this Directive, as appropriate, in providing interest-
free banking services and products.  
19. Transition Period  
 
A bank which is not in full compliance with the requirements of this Directive, due 
to the changes made, shall submit an action plan within ninety (90) days after this 
Directive enters into force, to fully comply within a maximum of two (2) years from 
the effective date of this Directive.    
 
 
 
 
22 
20. Repealed Directive  
Asset Classification and Provisioning Directive No. SBB/69/2018 (5th Replacement) 
is hereby repealed and replaced by this Directive. 
21. Effective Date 
This Directive shall enter into force as of 12th of June, 2024.
 
 
 
23 
ANNEX I 
1. Credit Impaired 
1.1 Evidence that a financial asset is credit-impaired include observable data about the 
following events: 
a) significant financial difficulty of the issuer or the borrower;  
b)  a breach of contract, such as a default or past due event, irrespective of the 
number of days past due;  
c) the lender(s) of the borrower, for economic or contractual reasons relating to 
the borrower’s financial difficulty, having granted to the borrower a 
concession(s) that the lender(s) would not otherwise consider;  
d) it is becoming probable that the borrower will enter bankruptcy or other financial 
reorganization;  
e) the disappearance of an active market for that financial asset because of 
financial difficulties; or  
f) the purchase or origination of a financial asset at a deep discount that reflects 
the incurred credit losses.  
1.2 It may not be possible to identify a single discrete event, instead, the combined 
effect of several events may have caused financial assets to become credit-
impaired. 
 
2. Forbearance-Restructure 
 
2.1       Financial difficulty 
 
Example of financial difficulties includes: 
a) a counterparty is currently past due on any of its exposures;  
b) a counterparty is not currently past due, but it is probable that it will be past due 
on any of its exposures in the foreseeable future without the concession (for 
instance, when there has been a pattern of delinquency in payments on its 
exposures);  
c) a counterparty’s outstanding securities have been delisted, are in the process of 
being delisted, or are under threat of being delisted from an exchange due to 
noncompliance with the listing requirements or for financial reasons;  
d) on the basis of actual performance, estimates and projections, the bank 
forecasts that all the counterparty’s committed/available cash flows will be 
insufficient to service all of its loans or debt securities (both interest and principal) 
in accordance with the contractual terms;  
 
 
 
24 
e) a counterparty’s exposures are categorized as exposures that have already 
evidenced difficulty in the ability to repay in accordance with the National Bank 
categorization scheme;  
f) a counterparty is in non-performing status or would be categorized as non-
performing without the concessions  
g) The counterparty cannot obtain funds from sources other than the existing 
banks at an effective interest rate equal to the current market interest rate for 
similar loans for a non-troubled counterparty. 
2.2 
Concession 
a) Concessions are special contractual terms and conditions provided by a bank 
to a counterparty facing financial difficulty so that the counterparty can 
sufficiently service its debt. The main characteristic of these concessions is that 
a bank would not extend loans or grant commitments to the counterparty, or 
purchase its debt securities, on such terms and conditions under normal market 
conditions. Concessions can be triggered by:  
i. 
changes in the conditions of the existing contract, giving considerably 
more favorable terms for the counterparty;  
ii. 
a supplementary agreement, or a new contract to refinance the current 
transaction; or  
iii. 
the exercise of clauses embedded in the contract that enable the 
counterparty to change the terms and conditions of its contract or to take 
on additional loans, debt securities or off-balance sheet items at its own 
discretion. These actions shall only be treated as concessions if the bank 
assesses that the counterparty is in financial difficulty.  
b) When a borrower is assessed as experiencing financial difficulty, examples of 
potential concessions are:  
i. 
extending the loan term;  
ii. 
rescheduling the dates of principal or interest payments;  
iii. 
granting new or additional periods of non-payment (grace period);  
iv. 
reducing the interest rate, resulting in an effective interest rate below the 
current interest rate that counterparties with similar risk characteristics 
could obtain from the same or other institutions in the market;  
v. 
capitalizing arrears;  
vi. 
forgiving, deferring or postponing principal, interest or relevant fees;  
vii. 
changing an amortizing loan to an interest payment only;  
 
 
 
25 
viii. 
releasing collateral or accepting lower levels of collateralization that does 
not match with or cover the outstanding loan balance;  
ix. 
allowing the conversion of debt to equity of the counterparty; 
x. 
deferring recovery/collection actions for extended periods of time; and 
easing of covenants.  
c) Refinancing an existing exposure with a new contract due to the financial 
difficulty of a counterparty could qualify as a concession, even if the terms of 
the new contract are no more favorable for the counterparty than those of the 
existing transaction. 
 
3. Significant Increase of Credit Risk (SICR) 
a) When determining whether the recognition of lifetime expected credit losses is 
required, an entity shall consider reasonable and supportable information that is 
available without undue cost or effort and that may affect the credit risk on a 
financial instrument. 
b) The following non-exhaustive list of information may be relevant in assessing 
changes in credit risk: 
i. 
an actual or expected significant change in the borrower’s external credit 
rating by rating agencies acceptable to the National Bank; 
ii. 
an actual or expected internal credit rating downgrade for the borrower 
or decrease in behavioral scoring used to assess credit risk internally;  
iii. 
existing or forecast adverse changes in business, financial or economic 
conditions that are expected to cause a significant change in the 
borrower’s ability to meet its debt obligations, such as an actual or 
expected increase in interest rates or an actual or expected significant 
increase in unemployment rates; 
iv. 
an actual or expected significant change in the operating results of the 
borrower. Examples include actual or expected declining revenues or 
margins, increasing operating risks, working capital deficiencies, 
decreasing asset quality, increased balance sheet leverage, liquidity, 
management problems or changes in the scope of business or 
organizational structure (such as the discontinuance of a segment of the 
business) that results in a significant change in the borrower’s ability to 
meet its debt obligations; 
v. 
significant increases in credit risk on other financial instruments of the 
same borrower; 
 
 
 
26 
vi. 
an actual or expected significant adverse change in the regulatory, 
economic, or technological environment of the borrower that results in a 
significant change in the borrower’s ability to meet its debt obligations, 
such as a decline in the demand for the borrower’s sales product because 
of a shift in technology; 
vii. 
significant changes in the value of the collateral supporting the obligation 
or in the quality of third-party guarantees or credit enhancements, which 
are expected to reduce the borrower’s economic incentive to make 
scheduled contractual payments or to otherwise have an effect on the 
probability of a default occurring. For example, if the value of collateral 
declines because house prices decline, borrowers in some jurisdictions 
have a greater incentive to default on their mortgages; 
viii. 
a significant change in the quality of the guarantee provided by a 
shareholder (or an individual’s parents) if the shareholder (or parents) has 
an incentive and financial ability to prevent default by capital or cash 
infusion; 
ix. 
significant changes, such as reductions in financial support from a parent 
entity or other affiliate or an actual or expected significant change in the 
quality of credit enhancement, that are expected to reduce the 
borrower’s economic incentive to make scheduled contractual 
payments; 
x. 
expected changes in the loan documentation including an expected 
breach of contract that may lead to covenant waivers or amendments, 
interest payment holidays, interest rate step-ups, requiring additional 
collateral or guarantees, or other changes to the contractual framework 
of the instrument; 
xi. 
significant changes in the expected performance and behavior of the 
borrower, including changes in the payment status of borrowers in the 
group; and  
xii. 
past due information, including the thirty (30) days rebuttable 
presumption. 
 
 
 
 
27 
Form-BSD1/SBB/90/2024 
Average Recovery Rate (ARR) Computation 
For the Quarter Ended_________________   
Name of the Bank ______________________ 
Reporting Date:_____________________ 
 
Table A: Collateralized Properties Foreclosed and Sold During the Last 18 Consecutive Months 
(In millions of Birr) 
No. 
 
No. 
 
 
Name of Borrower 
 
Type of the 
Property 
 
 
Date 
Sold 
Outstanding Principal 
Balance* 
Sale Value 
Expenses  
Related to  
Disposal 
Net Realized 
Value 
A 
B 
C 
D=B-C 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Total 
 
 
 
 
 
28 
 
 
 
Name of the Bank ___________________ 
Reporting Date:_____________________ 
 
Table B: Collateralized Properties Acquired During the Last 18 Consecutive Months 
(In millions of Birr) 
 
NoNn 
 
No. 
 
 
Name of 
Borrower 
 
Type of the 
Property 
 
 
Date 
Acquired 
Outstanding Principal 
Balance* 
Ask/ 
Reserve 
Price 
Highest  
Offered 
Bid 
Price 
Average 
Market 
Value  
Expenses  
Related to  
Acquisition 
Net Market 
Value 
A 
B 
 
 
C 
D=B-C 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Total 
 
 
 
*Backed by the collateral (property) 
Average Recovery Rate (ARR) = (Total Net Realized Value + Total Net Market Value)        X 100 =_________% 
                                                  (Aggregate Outstanding Principal Balance in Table A + Table B) 
    ARR= shall not be 15 percentage points greater than industry average to be provided by the National Bank. 
 
Prepared by: _________________                                         Approved by: ___________________ 
Signature: ___________________                                         Signature: ______________________
 
 
 
29 
 
 
Form – BSD2/SBB/90/2024 
Loan and Advances Classification and Provisioning 
For the Quarter Ended __________ 
(In Millions of Birr) 
Name of the Bank: ________________________________ 
Reporting Date: __________________________________ 
TABLE A: ON-BALANCE SHEET EXPOSURES 
 
 
Loan Classification 
 
 
Amount 
 
Deductible Collateral 
 
Provisioning 
Rate 
Required 
Provisions 
Accumulated 
Provisions Held 
in the Previous 
Period 
Excess/ 
Shortfall in 
Provisions 
Cash/Cash 
Substitute 
Net 
Recoverable 
Value* 
Total 
Net Loans and 
Advances 
A 
B 
C 
D=B+
C 
E=A-D 
F 
G=ExF 
H 
I=H-G 
1. Pass(sub-total) 
 
 
 
0 
 
 
 
 
 
  1.1 Term Loans 
 
 
 
0 
 
 
 
 
 
  1.2 Overdrafts 
 
 
 
0 
 
 
 
 
 
  1.3 Merchandise 
 
 
 
0 
 
 
 
 
 
  1.4 Others 
 
 
 
0 
 
 
 
 
 
2. 
Special Mention (sub-
total) 
 
 
 
0 
 
 
 
 
 
  2.1 Term loans 
 
 
 
0 
 
 
 
 
 
  2.2 Overdrafts 
 
 
 
0 
 
 
 
 
 
  2.3 Merchandise 
 
 
 
0 
 
 
 
 
 
  2.4 Others 
 
 
 
0 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
30 
3. 
Substandard 
(sub-
total) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3.1 Restructured 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   3.1.1 Term loans 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   3.1.2 Overdrafts 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   3.1.3Merchandise 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   3.1.4 Others 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3.2Not Restructured 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   3.2.1Term loans 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   3.2.2 Overdrafts 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3.2.3Merchandise 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   3.2.4 Others 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4. 
Doubtful (sub-total) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   4.1 Term loans 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   4.2 Overdrafts 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   4.3 Merchandise 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   4.4 Others 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5. 
Lost Loans (sub-total) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   5.1 Term loans 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   5.2 Overdrafts 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   5.3Merchandise 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   5.4 Others 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6. 
Total (1+2+…..+5) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7. Total  
Non-performing 
(3+4+5) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8. 
NPLs 
Total 
loans 
Ration (7/6) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
31 
 
 
 
* Net Recoverable Value (NRV) = Outstanding Principal Balance x ARR  
ARR = shall not be 15 percent points greater than industry average to be provided by the National Bank. 
 
Prepared by: _____________________________________                            Approved by: _____________________________________ 
Signature ________________________________________                            Signature _________________________________________ 
 
 
 
 
32 
 
 
Name of the Bank: ________________________________ 
Reporting Date: __________________________________ 
 
TABLE B: PROVISIONING FOR OFF-BALANCE SHEET EXPOSURES 
Off Balance Sheet Item 
Amount 
Provisioning Rate 
Required 
Provisions 
Accumulated Provisions 
Held in the Previous 
Period 
Excess/Shortfall 
in Provisions 
A 
B 
C=AXB 
D 
D-C 
Guarantee 
 
 
 
 
 
Commitment to provide Loan and 
Advance 
 
 
 
 
 
Letter of Credit 
 
 
 
 
 
Others 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Note:  
1. If counterparty has multiple off-balance sheet exposures, each exposure shall be listed separately in this template. 
2. Collateral does not apply in the provisioning calculation for all off balance exposures. 
 
 
 
Prepared by: _____________________________________               Approved by: _____________________________________ 
Signature ________________________________________               Signature _________________________________________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
33 
 
Form – BSD 3/SBB/90/2024 
Restructured Loans and Advances 
For the Quarter Ended __________ 
(In Millions of Birr) 
Name of the Bank: ________________________________ 
Reporting Date: __________________________________ 
TABLE A: RESTRUCTURED LOANS AND ADVANCES THAT ARE EQUAL TO OR ABOVE FIVE PERCENT (5%) OF TOTAL CAPITAL OF 
THE BANK (in Millions of Birr) 
Total Capital ______________________________ 
Name of the 
Counterparty/ 
Borrower 
Type of 
Loan and 
Advance 
 
Sector to 
which 
the Loan 
and 
Advance 
is 
provided 
Number 
of 
Iterations 
made so 
far to the 
Loan and 
Advance 
Type of 
Restructur
ing made 
Original 
Amount of 
Loan and 
Advance  
Amount of 
Loan and 
Advance after 
Latest 
Restructuring  
Date of Last 
Restructure 
Classification/S
tatus of Loan 
and Advance  
 
Type of 
Collateral 
 
Value of 
Collateral 
 
Loan and 
Advance as a 
percentage 
of Bank’s 
Total Capital  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NOTE: If a counterparty has multiple loans, each loan shall be listed separately in this template. 
 
Prepared by: ______________________  
 
 
 
 
Approved by: __________________ 
 
(name and signature) 
 
 
 
 
 
                        (name and signature) 
 
 
 
 
 
Telephone: __________________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Telephone: __________________________ 
 
 
 
34 
 
 
Name of the Bank: _______________________________ 
Reporting Date: __________________________________ 
 
TABLE B: AGGREGATE OF ALL RESTRUCTURED LOANS AND ADVANCES (in Million of Birr)  
 
Number of Restructured of Loan 
and Advances 
Amount of Restructured Loan and 
Advances 
 
Balance of Restructured Loans and Advances at the end of 
the previous quarter  
 
 
Restructured Loans and Advances during the Quarter 
 
 
Total Restructured Loans and Advances 
 
 
 
Prepared by: ______________________  
 
 
 
 
Approved by: __________________ 
 
(name and signature) 
 
 
 
 
 
                       (name and signature) 
 
 
 
 
 
Telephone: __________________  
 
 
 
 
 
Telephone: __________________________ 
 
 
 
 
 
35 
 
 
Form – BSD 4/SBB/90/2024 
Loans and Advances Re-categorized from Non-Accrual to Accrual Status 
For the Quarter Ended __________ 
(In Millions of Birr) 
Name of the Bank: ________________________________ 
Reporting Date: __________________________________ 
 
TABLE A: LOANS AND ADVANCES RE-CATEGORIZED FROM NON-ACCRUAL TO ACCRUAL STATUS THAT ARE EQUAL TO OR 
ABOVE FIVE PERCENT (5%) OF THE BANK’S TOTAL CAPITAL (in Millions of Birr) 
Total Capital ______________________________ 
Name of 
Counterparty/Borrow
er 
Type of Loan 
and Advance 
 
Sector to 
which the 
Loan and 
Advance is 
provided 
Amount of 
Loan and 
Advance 
 
Date of Re-
categorization 
Classificatio
n/Status of 
Loan and 
Advance 
 
Collateral 
Loan and Advance 
as a percentage of 
Bank’s Total 
Capital 
Type 
Value 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NOTE: If counterparty has multiple loans, each loan shall be listed separately in this template. 
 
Prepared by: ______________________  
 
 
 
 
Approved by: __________________ 
 
 
(name and signature) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(name and signature) 
 
 
 
 
 
Telephone: __________________  
 
 
 
 
 
Telephone: __________________________
 
 
 
36 
 
 
Name of the Bank: ________________________________ 
Reporting Date: __________________________________ 
 
TABLE B: AGGREGATE LOANS AND ADVANCES RE-CATEGORIZED FROM NON-ACCRUAL TO ACCRUAL STATUS (in Millions of 
Birr) 
 
Number of Loans and 
Advances Re-categorized from 
Non-Accrual to Accrual Status 
Amount of Loans and 
Advances Re-categorized from 
Non-Accrual to Accrual Status 
 
Balance of Loans and Advances Re-categorized from 
Non-Accrual to Accrual Status at the end of the previous 
quarter 
 
 
Loans and Advances Re-categorized from Non-Accrual to 
Accrual Status during the quarter 
 
 
Total Loans and Advances Re-categorized from Non-
Accrual to Accrual Status 
 
 
 
Prepared by: ______________________  
 
 
 
 
Approved by: __________________ 
 
  (name and signature) 
 
 
 
 
                                              (name and signature) 
 
 
 
 
 
Telephone: __________________  
 
 
 
 
 
Telephone: __________________________ 
