ANNUAL REPORT 
FOR FINANCIAL YEAR ENDED 
30 JUNE 2020
MISSION

VISION

"To be the First Choice
World Class Bank.”

|

I
| “To provide innovative, |
| competitive and diversified ,
| banking services accessible ,
| to the society with qualified ,
|
I
\

and dedicated staffina
profitable and socially ,
responsible manner.” |

~

APt 177

AwashBank

Nurturing Like the River

Ki

CORE VALUES
A- Accessibility
W-Wisdom
A-Accountability

S-Socially Responsible

H-Honesty

3
9
14
14
20
23
29
32
36
Board Chairman’s Message 
Chief Executive Officer’s Statement
Board  of Directors’ Report
1. Operational  Performances 
2. Financial Performance 
4. Corporate Social Responsibility
3. Vision 2025  Strategy 
Implementation Status and 
Organizational Developments 
5. Interest Free Banking (IFB) Sharia 
Advisory Committee’s Report For 
Financial Year 2019/20 
Auditors’  Report 
CONTENTS
Prosper with the Leading Private Bank! 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   i   |     Annual Report 2019/20
Highlights of Major Performances (In Millions of Birr)
Deposit
Total Assets 
Capital & Reserve
Profit  before Tax
Loans & Advances
 Annual Report 2019/20     |   ii 
Responding to Changing Life
581 POS Terminals

10,130 Staff

Mobile Banking

468 Active ATMs

Online Banking

466 Branches

Agent Banking

   1   |     Annual Report 2019/20
Prosper with the Leading Private Bank! 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Ambassador Dr. Dibaba Abdeta 
Chairman
Gure Kumssa
V/Chairman
Abaynesh Bekele
Director
Alemu Tita
Director
Beza Tadesse
Director
Abaynesh Merga
Director
THE BOARD OF 
DIRECTORS
 Annual Report 2019/20     |   2 
Gudissa Legesse
Director
Roba Arega
Director
Girma Guluma (Eng)
Director
Kedeme Teshome
Director
Getachew Olana
Director
Yoseph Yonas
Director
   3   |     Annual Report 2019/20
Prosper with the Leading Private Bank! 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
BOARD CHAIRMAN'S 
MESSAGE
Ambassador Dr. Dibaba Abdeta
Chairman
O
n behalf of the Board of Directors and on my 
own behalf, it is my great pleasure to well come 
you all to the 25th Awash Bank’s Shareholders’ 
Annual General Assembly Meeting of the FY 2019/20. 
I would also like to acknowledge our honored 
Shareholders, Customers, Management members and 
all other employees of the Bank for their continued 
trust, 
unshakable 
patronage 
and 
commitment 
extended to the Bank all the years, which enabled our 
Bank to register again another astonishing result in 
all spheres of its operational activities. It is our strong 
belief that your all-rounded support will continue to 
make your Bank to remain the leading private Bank in 
the coming years.
Despite the inconveniencies created by COVID-19 
Pandemic, it is a privilege to host this meeting in such 
environment to share the successes of your Bank 
in various spheres of operational areas, including 
deposits, loans and advances, income, branch networks 
and above all, gross profit during the financial year 
2019/20. 
The FY 2019/20 is the year of challenges to the country 
in general, and to the banking industry in particular. One 
of the challenges was the unprecedented Coronavirus 
(COVID-19) pandemic posed on the whole world in 
general and on the Ethiopian economy in particular. The 
other challenges were the relatively elevated inflation, 
political instability in some parts of the country and 
stiff competition in the banking industry. Despite 
all these challenges; however, our Bank operated 
efficiently and once again has recorded a meritorious 
performance and a unique result of its kind during 
the FY 2019/20. It is also worth mentioning that the 
Bank’s annual achievement was by far greater than 
the cascaded yearly planned target to be implemented, 
on the fourth year of the ten years Strategic Journey of 
“Transforming AB: Vision 2025” Project.
Awash Bank showed a continued progress in building 
a stronger and safer Bank that is capable of delivering 
higher returns to its Shareholders. Over recent years, 
the Bank has increased income, capital and dividend 
paid out with a track record of creating a significant 
value for the shareholders.  
When compared with the accomplishments of 
the preceding year for major activities, this year’s 
operational performance surpassed in all sectors. 
Accordingly, deposits increased by 19 percent, loans 
and advances by 21 percent, income by 27 percent and 
gross profit by 8 percent during the year under review. 
Earnings on foreign currency during the year has 
reached USD 865 million, which is slightly below last 
year same period by 6% (USD 53.8 million) owing to the 
decline of foreign currency earnings from remittance 
and exports due to the prevalence of the Coronavirus 
(COVID-19). 
Furthermore, total asset has reached Birr 89.3 billion, 
indicating a growth of 20% as compared to that of last 
year same period. The increments registered in income 
and gross profit in particular are because of the strong 
efforts made bank-wide to maximize the wallet-share 
of the Bank. The other major contributory factors are 
 Annual Report 2019/20     |   4 
the efforts exerted to reduce expense, the focused 
efforts made in the resource mobilization and also 
the continuous hard work put forth in the collection 
of loans as a result of which significant reduction 
was observed on the status of Non-Performing Loans 
(NPLs). 
The significant performances registered were the 
sum results of the wise guidance of the Board of 
Directors, the prudent and coordinated leadership of 
the Senior and Middle-Level Management as well as 
the unreserved commitment of the entire staff of the 
Bank who deserve commendations of the Board. 
In an effort to strengthen its asset base, the Bank 
has initiated own building construction projects at 
different strategic areas. This is believed to ensure 
long-term and sustainable growth of the assets of the 
Bank. The major landmark in relation to this initiative 
includes, the 2B+13 storey Bulbula Mixed-use Building 
whose construction work is under way. The Bank also 
acquired plots of land for new building projects both 
in Bale Robe and Asella towns whose construction 
processes are in good progress. In addition, with 
the desire to construct a new Head-Office Building 
commensurate with the image and size of Awash Bank, 
a construction site, with an area of 8,800 m2 has been 
solicited from the A.A City Administration whose title 
deed transfer and related payments are under process 
and hoped to be completed shortly.
With regard to the Human Resource Management 
Services of the Bank, the Human Resource Management 
Policies and Procedures of the Bank were revised to 
enable attracting, motivating and retaining qualified 
and skilled manpower. In line with this, steps were 
taken to improve manpower efficiency, focusing on 
optimizing the existing resource through promotions 
postings, transfers and skill development/capacity 
building initiatives. The nature of the business also 
requires continuous skill upgrading through in-house 
or outsourced trainings.  Accordingly, out of the 10,130 
employees of the Bank, short- term training was given 
to 7,724 employees and 640 employees were also 
sponsored by the Bank to pursue higher education at 
different levels during the year under review. A total 
of Birr 46.6 million was spent on human resource 
development during the FY 2019/20.  
I would like to stress at this point that the Board and 
the Management are confident to work hard during the 
financial year 2020/21, in spite of the continuing fierce 
competition amongst the banks and the fear of the 
spread of COVID-19.  The Board is also fully assertive 
that Awash Bank shall remain the leading private 
commercial bank in the country. Given the dedication 
of the Board, the commitment of the Management 
Team and the competency of the entire employees, 
the attainment of its grand vision of becoming “World 
Class Bank” is inevitable. 
The Bank continues to deliver on its strategic 
commitments, 
which 
drive 
the 
operational 
performances and create value for the owners of the 
Bank, the Shareholders as well as the communities 
at large. Both the Board and the Management are as 
determined and committed as before to combine their 
skills and energies and embark on registering yet 
another new shining success to maintain AB’s leading 
position amongst the private commercial banks  in the 
country.	
In addition to its corporate objectives, the contribution 
of the Bank to the growth of the national economy 
and the wellbeing of its citizens is conspicuous as 
observed from the tax paid and the corporate social 
responsibilities fulfilled. In line with this, during the FY 
2019/20, our Bank has made financial supports for the 
construction of the Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam 
(GERD), for the prevention of COVID-19 pandemic, for 
the Addis Ababa City and Regional Parks Development 
and for the Addis Ababa City School’s Students Feeding 
Program. The Bank has paid income and other taxes to 
the tune of Birr 1.3 billion during the FY 2019/20 and 
was offered a Platinum Award, as one of the top tax 
payers of the country.
 
In conclusion, on behalf of the Board of Directors, I 
would like to once again extend my sincere gratitude 
to the Bank’s Shareholders, Customers, Business 
Partners and other Stakeholders for their continuous 
and indispensable support and trust. My special 
appreciation goes to the Management Team and 
the entire employees, for their dedicated services, 
belongingness and hard work to upsurge their Bank, in 
delivering commendable results and enabling the Bank 
to maintain its leading position among the private 
commercial banks in the country.
I would like to thank the National Bank of Ethiopia 
(NBE) for providing us diligent guidance and strong 
support. I would also like to express my appreciation 
to Correspondent Banks, Diaspora Communities and 
NGOs for their willingness to cooperate and work 
with our Bank and we look forward to their continuous 
commitment to work with us in the future also.
Finally, recalling that the Bank has come a long way 
so far and has still a long way to go, I want to assure 
you that in the years to come, our Bank will strongly 
scrutinize the laid down Vision and Strategy to bring 
about further excellence by exploiting opportunities 
and withstanding the challenging environment. 
Thank you,
   5   |     Annual Report 2019/20
Prosper with the Leading Private Bank! 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Tsehay Shiferaw
Chief Executive Officer
Yohannes Merga
Chief Information Officer
Tadesse Gemeda
Chief, Wholesale Banking Officer
Henock Tessema
Chief, Retail & SME Banking Officer
Tilahun Geleta
Chief, Finance & Support 
Services Officer
Abebe Deressa
Chief, Corporate Strategy
 and Transformation Officer
Dessalegn Tolera
D/Chief, Credit Analysis
& Portfolio Mgt. Officer
EXECUTIVE
 MANAGEMENT
 Annual Report 2019/20     |   6 
hdsfsdfsrteryrjhdfwetdret
hdsfsdfsrteryrjhdfwetdret
hdsfsdfsrteryrjhdfwetdret
hdsfsdfsrteryrjhdfwetdret
hdsfsdfsrteryrjhdfwetdret
hdsfsdfsrteryrjhdfwetdret
hdsfsdfsrteryrjhdfwetdret
hdsfsdfsrteryrjhdfwetdret
hdsfsdfsrteryrjhdfwetdret
hdsfsdfsrteryrjhdfwetdret
hdsfsdfsrteryrjhdfwetdret
hdsfsdfsrteryrjhdfwetdret
hdsfsdfsrteryrjhdfwetdret
Abdella Adem
Director, Interest Free Banking 
Directorate
Hailu Maskala
Director, Learning & Development
Directorate
Ebisa Derbie
Director, Marketing & Communication
Directorate
Beyene Dekeba
Director, IT Infrastructure &
Service Mgt. Directorate
Berhanu Balcha
Director, Finance & Treasury
Directorate
Ephrem Bogale
Director, SME Banking Directorate
Gacho Warra
Director, Credit Portfolio 
Management Directorate
Hailu Woldegebriel
 Executive Assistant to the CEO
Teklu Wodajo
D/Chief, Human Resource Mgt. Officer
   7   |     Annual Report 2019/20
Prosper with the Leading Private Bank! 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Lemessa Bulti
Director, Internal Audit
Directorate
Lemi Furgasa
Director, Credit Appraisal
& Analysis Directorate
Netsanet W/Kidan
Director, Trade Services Directorate
Nurfeta Legesse
Director, Business Solutions 
Directorate
Takele Arega
Director, Legal Services Directorate
Soressa Alemu
Director, Shared Service Directorate
EXECUTIVE
 MANAGEMENT
hdsfsdfsrteryrjhdfwetdret
hdsfsdfsrteryrjhdfwetdret
hdsfsdfsrteryrjhdfwetdret
hdsfsdfsrteryrjhdfwetdret
hdsfsdfsrteryrjhdfwetdret
hdsfsdfsrteryrjhdfwetdret
hdsfsdfsrteryrjhdfwetdret
hdsfsdfsrteryrjhdfwetdret
Lamessa Soboka
Director, Corporate 
Banking Directorate
Kefyalew Shiferaw
Director, E-Banking
Operation Directorate
 Annual Report 2019/20     |   8 
hdsfsdfsrteryrjhdfwetdret
hdsfsdfsrteryrjhdfwetdret
hdsfsdfsrteryrjhdfwetdret
hdsfsdfsrteryrjhdfwetdret
Tegene Tesfaye
Director, Business Banking 
Directorate
Temesgen Busha
Director. Strategy & Corporate
Transformation Directorate
Temesgen Workineh
Director, Employee Service &
Talent Mgt. Directorate
Yonas Kumera
Board Secretary
Yordanos Mekonen
Director, Enterprise Risk &
Compliance Mgt. Directorate
Wondimagegnehu Birhanu
Director, Talent Acquisition &
On Boarding Directorate
Zebene Kaba
Director, Personal Banking Directorate
   9   |     Annual Report 2019/20
Prosper with the Leading Private Bank! 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE
OFFICER'S
STATEMENT
Tsehay Shiferaw
Chief Executive Officer
O
n  behalf  of the Management of Awash 
Bank and on my own behalf, I would like to 
congratulate all Shareholders of the Bank, 
respected Board of Directors, esteemed customers, 
committed Management members, all hard working 
staff and other stakeholders of the Bank on the extra-
ordinary achievement our Bank has recorded in almost 
all financial and non-financial parameters for the 
financial year ended June 30, 2020.
Let me seize this opportunity to congratulate you all 
and the Shareholders, Board of Directors, customers, 
Management and staff members of our sister company, 
Awash Insurance Company S.C., on the successful and 
memorable commemoration of the Silver Jubilee of 
the formation of the twin companies. The Silver Jubilee 
Celebration, which was commemorated for one month 
from October 25 up until November 23, 2019 under the 
theme, “Celebrating Success, Envisioning the Future” 
and a series of eye-catching events that took place 
corresponding to the anniversary celebration were 
very colorful, inclusive, creative and up to the standard 
of the two companies. 
The celebration has, in fact, played its part for the sister 
companies to maintain their outstanding positions in 
the industries they are operating. The 25th Anniversary 
Book, which is prepared by a local consulting firm in 
the above regards, has the details about the history, 
growth and development of the sister companies apart 
from covering the banking and insurance industries of 
the country in perspective.
The Anniversary Book covers a wide-range of subjects 
and due attention has been given to it during its 
preparation. No doubt, it will serve as a reference 
material not only for the Awash community but also 
for the stakeholders and the general public who are 
interested to know about the progress and current 
developmens of banking and insurance business in the 
country. I hope, all those interested will enjoy reading 
the Book and benefit a lot out of it.  
The financial year just ended was indeed a very 
challenging year by all standards. The novel 
coronavirus (COVID-19), which was declared by 
the World Health Organization (WHO) as a global 
pandemic, has totally disrupted the economic, political, 
social and cultural fabrics of societies across the 
globe. The world economy experienced a historic and 
unprecedented economic shock. The impact of this 
global pandemic was unparalleled and it resulted in 
closure of businesses domestically as well as globally. 
The health crisis led to economic crisis, which in many 
places led to social crisis as a result of what is referred 
in Economics as a Domino Effect.  
Domestically, business was not as usual. The 
impact of the coronavirus was far-reaching and 
such economic sectors like tourism and hospitality, 
transport, construction, entertainment industry and 
manufacturing were very much vulnerable and hard hit 
 Annual Report 2019/20     |   10 
by the pandemic. In an effort to ameliorate the possible 
destructive situations of the virus on the well-being of 
human life in general and on business in particular, our 
Bank made some amendments on fees, commissions 
and charges as well as on lending interest rate of 
selected seriously hit sectors so that our customers 
will be able to withstand the problem and keep on 
sustaining their business. 
Donations of over Birr 11 million was given to the 
Federal Government and other charity organizations 
to deal with the problem. Millions of Birr was also 
expended to purchase face mask, glove, sanitizer and 
other items for our staff and esteemed customers 
to prevent the spread of the pandemic. All-in-all, as 
a result of the unexpected coronavirus (COVID-19) 
pandemic, our Bank has foregone hundreds of millions 
of Birr that could otherwise have been an income to 
the Bank. 
Though the performance of the export sector was 
commendable in the first half of the financial year, the 
export income, especially from the export of flower, has 
significantly declined in the second half mainly because 
of the lockdown in the European countries, movement 
restriction and declaration of state of emergency by 
most countries. In aggregate, the pandemic resulted in 
decline and slowdown of the economy in general.
Apart from the above, instability in some parts of the 
country and subsequent closure of branch offices for a 
couple of days, stiff competition among local banks for 
resource mobilization and the 30% foreign currency 
surrender requirement, which is still in place, are the 
challenges encountered during the financial year.  
In spite of the above serious challenges, however, with 
a concerted effort of all, our Bank was able to perform 
commendably well in almost all financial and non-
financial parameters. 
Awash Bank’s gross profit before tax stood at Birr 3.6 
billion from Birr 3.34 billion of last year same period; 
i.e. Birr 256 million or 8% growth. This performance is 
by far the highest in the history of our Bank as well as 
in the private banking industry. 
Following the shareholders’ decision at its 16th Extra-
ordinary Meeting held on  November 30, 2019 to raise 
the paid-up capital of the Bank from Birr 6 billion to 
Birr 12 billion in three years time, the paid-up capital 
has now reached Birr 5.85 billion from Birr 4.38 billion 
of last year same period; that is, an increment of Birr 
1.46 billion or 33.4%. Spurred by the capital increment, 
earning per share (EPS) has slightly declined from 
632 in 2019 to 510 in 2020 for a par value of Birr 
1,000. Nevertheless, I believe, it is very lucrative and 
encouraging to the shareholders. 
The cost of operation for the year just ended was 
tremendous. This was generally because of enhanced 
operation, inflationary situation for goods and services 
country-wide, opening of 56 new branches against the 
plan of 40 and unexpected costs in connection with the 
prevention of the spread of coronavirus (COVID-19).
Accordingly, the total expense of the Bank has 
escalated from Birr 4.71 billion in 2019 to Birr 6.6 billion 
in 2020. Of the total expense items, interest expense, 
personnel expense, and other operating expenses took 
the highest share in their order.
Total deposit as at June 30, 2020 stood at Birr 74.3 
billion and that was the highest deposit balance ever 
registered in our Bank as well as in the history of 
private banks. The deposit balance grew by Birr 11.8 
billion or 19% in 2020 as compared to 2019.
Total asset significantly grew from Birr 74.64 billion in 
2019 to Birr 89.3billion in 2020; i.e., a growth of Birr 
1.47 billion or 19.7% and that is commendable by all 
standards. Loans and advances took the lion’s share of 
the total asset accounting for Birr 57.3 billion or 64% 
of the total asset of the Bank. NBE bills accounted for 
Birr 9.9 billion or 11% of the total asset, but thanks 
to the Government’s decision to cease the 27% bills 
purchase requirement, the bills so far purchased are 
being redeemed at maturity and this will strengthen 
the liquidity position of the Bank for provision of loans 
and advances to those sectors that are in need of it.
The NPLs ratio as at June 30, 2020 stood at 1.7% and 
this was much lower than the threshold; i.e. 5%, set by 
the NBE. The NPLs ratio in comparison with the total 
loan portfolio is not as such big enough but still effort 
will be exerted with greater vigor to maintain the ratio 
at the lowest possible limit.
In general, the financial year 2019/20 was thriving 
in many respects as can be substantiated with the 
following, among others, major success stories:
1.	
For the fourth time, our Bank has successfully 
 
	
achieved all the targets set in the Grand Strategy. 
 
	
Hence, our journey to “Becoming One of the Top 
 
	
Ten East African Commercial Banks by the year 
 
	
2025” is very likely achievable,
2.	
The Performance Management System, which 
 
	
is used in the planning, reward, staff capacity 
 
	
development and staff motivation system, has 
 
	
been internally developed and it will be put in 
 
	
place effective from FY 2020/21,
3.	
The Bank’s new six story Jimma Building was fully 
 
	
completed 
and 
colorfully 
inaugurated 
on 
 
   11   |     Annual Report 2019/20
Prosper with the Leading Private Bank! 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
	
November 16, 2019. The constructions of Bulbula 
 
	
Building here in Addis Ababa and Bale Robe 
 
	
Building have been started and are progressing 
 
	
well. Plots of land for our future Head-quarters 
 
	
Building and Assela Building have also been 
 
	
secured,
4.	
With the establishment of Coronavirus (COVID-19) 
 
	
Prevention Ad-hoc Committee bank-wide, all 
 
	
necessary awareness creation was made about the 
 
	
virus to all staff members of the Bank. The 
 
	
Committee is serving as a liaison between the 
 
	
Bank and external organs in the dissemination of 
 
	
information about the virus, provision of necessary 
 
	
support to vulnerable of the problem and the like. 
 
	
At this point, the work of the Ad-hoc Committee to 
 
	
withstand the problem and at the same time to 
 
	
ensure continuity of business is appreciable,
5.	
The effort to capacitate all staff members by 
 
	
providing the necessary training in-house, locally 
 
	
as well as abroad went extremely well and our 
 
	
Bank has fully utilized the budget earmarked in 
 
	
this regard.
The year ahead is expected to be challenging in the 
sense that competition among banks for deposit will be 
stiff, the 30% foreign currency surrender requirement, 
which is still in place, will erode the hard-won hard 
currencies of banks and the impact of the coronavirus 
(COVID-19) on business will sustain for some time to 
come. More specifically, banks will be challenged with 
the following objective realities:
i.	
As we all recall, Ethiopia’s parliament passed a bill 
 
	
to open up the country’s financial sector to its 
 
	
citizens who have taken other nationalities, 
	
including allowing them to buy shares in local 
 
	
banks. This move is aimed at boosting the 
 
	
country’s foreign exchange reserve and at the 
 
	
same time to enable the Ethiopian-born diaspora 
 
	
take part in the economic growth of the country.
	
A number of conventional and Islamic banks, some 
 
	
of them with even big capital subscription, 
 
	
are either under formation or about to commence 
 
	
operation and all these are expected to make the 
 
	
banking business tough.
ii.	
The coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic is expected 
 
	
to slow down economic growth and exacerbates 
 
	
poverty. This will make the existing trend of doing 
 
	
“business as usual” challenging,
iii.	
Business is all about peace and stability. 
 
	
Obstacles, failure, risk and uncertainty are 
 
	
everywhere. However, as John C. Maxwell, a 
 
	
leadership guru, underscored in his book entitled, 
 
	
Leadership Secrets:
	
“Success does not mean avoiding failure. All of 
 
	
us fail. As we travel, we all hit potholes, take 
 
	
wrong turns or forget to check the radiator. The 
 
	
only person who avoids failure altogether is the 
 
	
person who never leaves his/her driveway. So, 
 
	
the real issue is not whether you are going to fail. 
 
	
It’s whether you are going to fail successfully 
 
	
(profiting from failure)”.
I’m still very optimistic that things will get better in 
the times to come and Awash will florish nurturing its 
customers like the river.
At this point, I would like to once again extend my special 
gratitude to our valued customers for their loyalty and 
dedicated Management and strong staff members for 
the commendable performance registered.
At the end, I would also like to thank all Shareholders, 
Board of Directors, Federal and Regional Government 
Offices and especially the National Bank of Ethiopia and 
Financial Intelligence Center for their support, advice 
and guidance in our effort to achieve our business 
objectives.
May the Almighty God bless us all and our country!
 Annual Report 2019/20     |   12 
PICTORIAL PRESENTATION OF 
SHAREHOLDERS’ MEETING
Partial View of the 24th Ordinary Shareholders' Meeting, November 30, 2019
Board of Directors in Group
   13   |     Annual Report 2019/20
Prosper with the Leading Private Bank! 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PICTORIAL PRESENTATION OF 
SEMI-ANNUAL MANAGEMENT MEETING, 
2019/20
Partial View of ManagementMeeting, 2019/20
 Annual Report 2019/20     |   14 
Board  of Directors’ Report
The Board of Directors of Awash Bank feels honored 
to present the Annual Report and the Audited 
Financial Statements of the Bank to the 25th Annual 
General Meeting of Shareholders of Awash Bank. 
The report has been prepared in accordance with 
the International Financial Reporting Standards 
(IFRS), covering the period from July 1, 2019 to June 
30, 2020.
Awash 
Bank 
continued 
to 
exhibit 
strong 
operational and financial performances in FY 
2019/20, notwithstanding the global and domestic 
headwinds. During FY 2019/20, the global economy 
has 
encountered 
trade 
policy 
uncertainties, 
geopolitical tensions and  outbreak of Novel 
Corona Virus Disease (COVID-19) pandemic. Various 
mitigation measures(such as lockdowns, travel 
bans, closure of schools and businesses) imposed 
by most countries to limit the spread of COVID-19 
have disrupted consumption and investment 
activities, global trade flows, global production 
and supply chains, commodity prices and tourism 
flows.	
According to World Bank’s forecast of June 2020, 
the global economy is estimated to be in recession 
in 2020. The global economy is projected to contract 
sharply by 5.2 percent in 2020, much worse than 
during the 2008–09 financial crisis.
Commodity prices have been hit hard by the 
COVID-19 outbreak, though the impact varied 
significantly across commodities, depending on the 
specific end-use sectors and regions affected by the 
outbreak and on the storability and supply elasticity 
of the commodity. For instance, the prices of oil, 
industrial metals, textiles and fresh cut flowers have 
collapsed, while prices of coffee Arabica, wheat and 
rice have shown some improvements.
With regard to domestic economic developments, 
Ethiopian economy grew by 6.1 percent in 2019/20, 
lower than the original forecast of 9 percent, largely 
reflecting the adverse impact of the COVID-19 
pandemic. Inflation also hovered above 15 percent, 
far above the Government’s single digit target. 
The year also witnessed fastest depreciation of 
the exchange rate and widening of the premium 
between the official and the parallel market rate and 
major liquidity shortages in the banking system.
In spite of the global and domestic challenges, 
Awash Bank has registered impressive results 
in key operational and financial areas, indicating 
the Bank’s ability to manage challenges and take 
advantage of the opportunities as they come along. 
FY 2019/20 was also a special year for Awash 
Bank, as it marks the Silver Jubilee Anniversary of 
the Bank. Over the past 25 years, Awash Bank has 
played its key role in driving the economic growth 
of the country and providing commendable banking 
services to its customers. 
1. OPERATIONAL PERFORMANCES
Awash Bank continued to exhibit strong operational 
performances in FY 2019/20  and that has not 
only positioned it as the leading private bank in 
Ethiopia, but also paved the way for attaining its 
 
 
strategic aspirations  of becoming “One of the Top 
Ten Private Banks in East Africa by 2025”. The 
performance of the Bank reveals that Awash Bank 
is undoubtedly the largest private bank in Ethiopia 
for the last five years in a row in terms of total 
deposits, total loans and advances, total assets and 
profits.
1.1 Mobilization of Deposits
In an effort to enhance the deposit mobilization 
endeavor of the Bank and drive the financial 
inclusion strategy of the country, Awash Bank has 
successfully attracted new customers to the Bank 
through expansion of both conventional and Interest 
Free Banking Services. Impelled by expansion of 
customer base and offerings of customer centric 
products using different service delivery channels, 
the aggregate deposit of the Bank, including interest 
free banking and margin held on letters of credit, 
rose to Birr 74.3 billion by the end of FY 2019/20, 
up by Birr 11.8 billion (19 percent) compared with the 
same period of last year.
Awash Bank has made superb progress in delivery 
of efficient and reliable Shariah Compliant Interest 
Free Banking Services. Consequently, interest 
free banking deposits reached Birr 3.95 billion as 
at June 30,2020, registering a growth of Birr 1.75 
billion (79.5 percent )  from last year’s similar period 
balance of Birr 2.2 billion. 
   15   |     Annual Report 2019/20
Prosper with the Leading Private Bank! 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The funding mix of the Bank reveals that saving 
deposits accounted for the major portion of total 
deposits (60 percent), followed by demand deposits 
Figure 1: Deposit Structure as at June 30, 2020
Table 1: Aggregate Deposits by Type (In Millions of Birr)                                                             
(27 percent), time deposits (8 percent) and L/C 
margin (5 percent).
 Annual Report 2019/20     |   16 
1.2 Loans and Advances
In line with the Bank’s brand promise of “Nurturing 
Like the River”, Awash Bank provides loans 
and advances that help to improve the lives of 
individuals, boost business activities and enhance 
the overall economic development of Ethiopia as 
a whole. The case in point is the agreement signed 
between Awash Bank and The United States 
Agency for International Development (USAID) 
on December 13, 2019 for partial guarantee of 
qualifying loans. The objective of the agreement 
is to enhance the lending capacity of Awash Bank 
to Agricultural Small and Medium Enterprises and 
local Microfinance Institutions (MFIs). MFIs, in turn, 
are also expected to provide on-lending facilities to 
individuals, micro and small businesses, including 
Productive Safety Net Program clients.
The total outstanding loans and advances extended 
to different sectors of the economy, including 
interest free financing, remarkably rose to Birr 57.3 
billion by the end of June 2020, up by Birr 10.0 billion 
(21%) from Birr 47.3 billion a year ago.
All sectors of the economy were the beneficiaries 
of the services. Accordingly, loans and advances 
availed to  domestic trade and services accounted 
for the lion’s share (24 percent), followed by 
building and construction (22 percent), export (19 
percent), manufacturing (12  percent),  import (10 
percent), personal loans (7 percent), transport (4 
percent) and others (3 percent).
Financing to Shariah compliant projects through 
Interest Free Banking scheme stood at  Birr one 
billion  as at June 30,2020, up by Birr 765.9  million 
(294 percent ) compared with the same period of 
last year. 
Table 2: Loans and Advances by Economic Sectors (In Millions of Birr)                         
   17   |     Annual Report 2019/20
Prosper with the Leading Private Bank! 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Some of the Investments (Businesses) 
Financed by Awash Bank
DINA Food Processing
 Annual Report 2019/20     |   18 
1.3 International Banking Services
The outbreak of COVID-19 pandemic and the downward trend of global economy has adversely affected 
the inflow of foreign currency to Ethiopia, particularly from services (hotels, tour operators etc.,) and 
inward remittances. Nevertheless, Awash Bank continued to maintain strong relationships with exporters, 
international money transfer agents, correspondent banks and international card payment operators to 
enhance the inflow of foreign currency to the country.
To enhance the scarce foreign exchange earning capacity of the country through exports, Awash Bank has 
availed loans and advances to exporters, whose outstanding loans stood at Birr 10.7 billion as at June 30, 
2020.  Similarly, to boost foreign exchange earnings from inward remittances, the Bank continued to roll-
over the lottery based incentive mechanism. Accordingly, the Bank has awarded the prizes for the 7th and 
8th round lottery winners in 2019/20. 
   19   |     Annual Report 2019/20
Prosper with the Leading Private Bank! 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Partial View of 
7th & 8th Rounds 
Lottery Award 
Ceremony
 Annual Report 2019/20     |   20 
Figure 2: Trends in Total Assets (In Billions of Birr)
1.4 Total Assets
Total assets of the Bank grew by Birr 14.7 billion 
 
(19.7 percent) and reached Birr 89.3 billion by the end 
of June 30, 2020 compared with the same period of 
last year, largely reflecting the substantial  growth 
of loans and advances supported by the repayment 
of NBE bills. Early repayment of NBE bills by the 
National Bank of Ethiopia to respective banks 
has been used by the Government as a monetary 
policy stimulus to alleviate the liquidity problem of 
banks amidst the outbreak of COVID-19 pandemic in 
Ethiopia.
The balance sheet structure of the Bank reveals 
that net loans and advances account for 63 percent 
of total assets. On the other hand, deposits from 
customers constitute the lion’s share (91 percent) of 
total liabilities, depicting the fact that deposits are 
the major source of funding in the intermediation 
role of Awash Bank.
1.5 Capital 
Following the decision of Shareholders of Awash 
Bank to raise the paid-up capital of the Bank to Birr 
6 billion by the end of June 2020 and thereafter 
double it to Birr 12 billion in three years’ time, the 
paid-up capital of the Bank has increased by Birr 
1.5 billion and stood at Birr 5.8 billion as at June 
30, 2020 from Birr 4.4 billion a year ago. The total 
equity of the Bank also grew to Birr 11.97 billion at 
the end of June 30, 2020 from Birr 9.6 billion last 
year same period.  
Awash Bank always maintains a health buffers on 
its capital over the regulatory minimum capital 
requirements. In this regard, the Birr 5.8 billion paid-
up capital of the Bank was by far above the minimum 
regulatory requirement of Birr 500 million and the 
overall capital adequacy ratio of the Bank is well 
above the 8 percent statutory requirement.
2. FINANCIAL PERFORMANCE
The overall financial performance of Awash Bank 
during financial year 2019/20 was gratifying 
despite the outbreak of COVID-19 pandemic, the 
slowdown in Ethiopian economic growth, persistent 
high inflation and stiff competition among banks 
operating in Ethiopia. 
2.1 Income
Total income of the Bank  amounted to Birr 10.2 
billion from Birr 8 billion in 2018/19,  depicting a 
growth of  Birr 2.2  billion (27 percent), driven by 
strong improvements in interest income and  fees 
and commission income. Interest income rose by 
32 percent and stood at Birr 7.9 billion, reflecting 
a surge in loans and advances. Similarly, income 
from fees and commission grew by 19 percent and 
reached Birr 1.6 billion, largely associated with 
fees derived from trade services operations and 
expansion of digital financial services.
As for the revenue structure, interest income 
continued to account for the largest share of the 
total income (77%), followed by fees and commission 
income (16 percent) and other operating income (7 
percent). 
   21   |     Annual Report 2019/20
Prosper with the Leading Private Bank! 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table 3: Components of Income (In Millions of Birr)
Figure 3: Income Composition as at June 30, 2020
2.2. Expenses
The total expenses of the Bank amounted  to Birr 6.6 
billion by the end of June 2020, up by Birr 1.9 billion 
(40 percent) from last year , mainly due to  a surge in 
interest bearing deposits, personnel expenses and 
impairment charge on loans and other assets.
Interest expense increased by 26 percent and 
reached Birr 2.7 billion during the review period. 
Similarly, personnel expenses increased by 36 
percent and stood at Birr 2.2 billion, owing to the 
need to attract and retain qualified and experienced 
personnel 
through 
implementing 
competitive 
salary and benefit schemes.  
Impairment charges on loans and other assets rose 
to Birr 588 million from Birr 93 million a year ago, 
reflecting an increase in the total loan portfolio 
of the Bank and the cautionary measure taken by 
the Bank to maintain the asset quality of the Bank. 
Similarly, depreciation and amortization expenses, 
which consist of depreciation expenses of property 
& equipment,  land lease for construction of own 
 Annual Report 2019/20     |   22 
Table 4:  Composition of Expense (In Millions of Birr)
Figure 4: Components of Expense as at June 30, 2020 
buildings & lease of spaces for branch office and 
amortization of computer software, stood at Birr 
477 million as at June 30, 2020. 
The expense structure of the Bank continued to be 
dominated by interest expense, which accounted for 
40 percent of total expenses, followed by personnel 
expenses (34 percent), and other operating expense 
(10 percent). Depreciation & amortization expenses 
and impairment charge on loans and other assets, 
on the other hand, constitute the remaining 16 
percent.
   23   |     Annual Report 2019/20
Prosper with the Leading Private Bank! 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2.3 Profit 
Notwithstanding 
the 
global 
and 
domestic 
challenges, Awash Bank continued to maintain its 
leading position as the most profitable private bank 
in Ethiopia, by recording a profit before tax of Birr 
3.6 billion in 2019/20. It is worth mentioning here 
that in an attempt to withstand the adverse impacts 
of COVID-19 pandemic on selected economic sectors 
of the county, Awash Bank has reduced the lending 
interest rate and waived fees and charges for a 
given period.
 Meanwhile, earnings per share slightly declined to 
Birr 510 in 2019/20 from Birr 632 in 2018/19 for a 
par value of Birr 1000, mainly due to a substantial 
increase (an increase of Birr 1.5 billion) in the paid-
up capital of the Bank and impairment changes on 
loans and other assets. 
Table 5: Trends in Profit (In Millions of Birr)
2.4. Proposal on Dividend Payout
Out of the total appropriable net profit of Birr 
2,591,154,900.30 (two billion five hundred ninety 
one million one hundred fifty four thousand 
nine hundred and thirty cents) after considering 
deductions in legal reserve and other allowances, 
the Board of Directors of Awash Bank recommended 
that Birr 98,531,953.12 (ninety eight million five 
hundred thirty one thousand nine hundred fifty 
three and twelve cents) be retained and a dividend 
of Birr 1,872,107,109.20 ( one billion eight hundred 
seventy two million one hundred seven thousand 
one hundred nine and twenty cents) be paid 
to shareholders in cash  or for purchasing the 
Bank’s shares, depending upon the choice of each 
shareholder.
3.	 VISION 2025 STRATEGY  
	
IMPLIMENTATION STATUS 
	
AND OTHER DEVELOPMENTS
3.1	Vision  2025  Strategy  Initiatives  
	
Implementation Status 
In view of attaining its grand vision of becoming 
“One of the Top Ten Banks in East Africa by the 
end of 2025”, Awash Bank has executed various 
initiatives during the last four years. During FY 
2019/20 as well, Awash Bank has performed the 
following main activities:-
•	
Developed and implemented Contact Center 
 
	
(CC)  and  Customer Relationship Management 
	
(CRM)  solutions; 
•	
Expanded the customer base of the Bank in 
 
	
terms of deposit account holders (both 
 
	
conventional and IFB),  borrowers,  ATM card 
 
	
users, 
M-wallet 
and 
Internet 
banking 
 
	
subscribers;
•	
Expanded its service delivery channels; 
•	
Developed and rolled out new products 
 
	
and services tailored to different segments  of 
 
	
customers;
•	
Crafted/amended 
various 
policies 
and 
 
	
procedures that will support the execution of 
 
	
the strategy;
•	
Acquired land for the future new Headquarters 
 
	
of AB;
•	
Ensured business continuity of the Bank amidst 
 
	
COVID-19 pandemic.
 Annual Report 2019/20     |   24 
Partial Pictorial Presentation of the 25th Anniversary 
Celebration of Awash Bank
Opening Celebration of the Anniversary at Head Office, October 25, 2019
   25   |     Annual Report 2019/20
Prosper with the Leading Private Bank! 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Closing Celebration of the 25th Anniversary at Sheraton Addis, November 23, 2019
25th Anniversary Celebration at some Branch Offices
 Annual Report 2019/20     |   26 
3.2. Human Resource Development
Awash 
Bank 
duly 
recognizes 
the 
strategic 
importance of its workforce in achieving its business 
objectives. In this regard, the Bank not only gives 
much emphasis on the recruitment of qualified 
employees, but also focuses on the development 
of the capacity of employees through providing 
 
requisite training and retaining of qualified 
personnel through providing conducive working 
environment. Indeed, Awash Bank is committed to 
recruit, retain and develop talents as employees are 
essential to the Bank’s current and future success.
1,084 new employees were recruited during 
financial year 2019/20 raising the Bank’s total 
workforce to 10,130, making the Bank one of the 
leading employers among private banks. With 
regard to training, the Bank has offered training 
opportunities to 7,724 employees during the 
review period and made financial assistance to 640 
employees pursuing higher education at different 
universities and colleges. In general, the Bank spent 
over Birr 46.6 million for the capacity development 
of its employees during FY 2019/20.
3.3 Service Delivery Channels 
Awash Bank has continued to provide quality 
services to its customers across all channels, with 
the objective of enabling its esteemed customers to 
get banking services anytime, anywhere.
Physical 
networks, 
namely, 
branches, 
ATM 
terminals and POS terminals   are the main service 
delivery channels the Bank is using to provide 
quality services for its honored customers.   During 
financial year 2019/20, the Bank has opened a total 
of 56 new branches across the country, raising   its 
total branch networks to 466 as at June, 2020. With 
466 branches, 468 ATMs and 581 POS terminals 
strategically spread across the country, Awash 
Bank has served a large number of customers in 
accessing basic banking services. 
Awash Bank has also been offering 24 hour 
convenient access to banking services through its 
internet and mobile banking platforms. The Bank’s 
Call Center also provides 24 hours personalized 
services to customers.
New Board of Directors Induction Program
Training to Management Members
   27   |     Annual Report 2019/20
Prosper with the Leading Private Bank! 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
List of Newly Opened Full Fledged Interest 
Free Banking (IKHLAS) Branches during the 
Financial Year 2019/20
1	 Ababil	
9     Ihsan	
2	 Afdal	
10    Khidma	
3	 Amal	
11     Muamalat   	
4	 Amanah 	
12     Naafii	
5	 Ber Waquo 	
13      Nahar	
6	 Berekah	
14      Noor  		
7	 Hira	
15     Yussra
8  Huda	
	
	
List of Newly Opened Conventional 
Branches during Financial Year 2019/20
1	 Aba Buna 	
22 	
Kamashi	
2	 Abado Meskelegna 23	
KaraGirar Sefer	
3	 Amist Kilo 	
24	
Kidame Gebeya	
4	 Amuru 	
25	
Kilinto	
5	 Anfo 	
26	
Kofele	
6	 Asendabo 	
27	
Kuch	
7	 Ayer Tena 	
28	
Merkato Arategna	
8	 Baku Shanan	
	
Mazoriya	
	
 
9	 Bulbula 93 Mazoria	29	
Sagure 	
10	Chomen Guduru	
30	
Sawla	
11	 Durame	
31	
Semen Mazegaja	
12	Elala	
32	
Shebe	
	
13	Filtu	
33	
Shone	
14	 Garo	
34	
Siltana	
15	Gera   	
35	
Tana		
16	Ginde Woin	
36	
Tegbare-Ed
17	Hayat 49 Mazoria	
37	
Tilili		
18	Hora Fincha	
38	
Tulu Boke
19	Huruta	
39	
Tulu Dimtu	
20 Jara	
40	
Uke Kersa	
21 Jimma Rare	
41	
Zenbaba
	
	
	
3.4 Information Technology
During the period under review, Awash Bank was 
mainly engaged in enhancement of its system. 
Enhancement of the existing Core Banking System 
is expected to bring a benefit to the existing services 
offer in the Bank including Bulk Payments, Mobile 
App, Payment Portal and Dashboards to business 
customers, QR payment features with loyalty 
products.
Another major enhancement includes School Fee 
Payments, Billers payments through Derash (e.g. 
tax and other bills/utility payments), enhancements 
on M-Wallet and Agency Banking business and 
CRM implementation rollout across branches, fund 
transfer interoperability across banks and POS 
interoperability. 
The Bank has as well developed its own Open API for 
an ease in third party integration, boosting strategic 
business partnership, encouraging online payments 
through e-commerce, and facilitating e-delivery. 
This will help the Bank in generating value driven 
online transactions and help its customers in the 
move towards digital transformation. 
During FY 2019/20, the Bank has witnessed a 
strong move towards automating government bills 
and large business payments. Among these, traffic 
penalty payments and DSTv payments automation 
are to mention a few. Similar approach has also been 
pursued with transport operators and taxi hailing 
companies while automating the payment testing 
is going on in parallel.
 Annual Report 2019/20     |   28 
3.5 Construction of Own Buildings
Following the completion of B+G+6 building in Jimma 
Town, the Bank has colorfully inaugurated ‘Jimma 
Building’ in the presence of Government officials, 
Board of Directors, invited guests, management and 
employees. 
Awash Bank also continued to construct new 
buildings as a mechanism of expanding its asset 
base and reducing the rental cost of branch 
offices. Accordingly, the construction of 2B+G+13 
Bulbula building and B+G+4 Bale Robe building 
are well underway. During financial year 2019/20, 
the Bank has secured land from Addis Ababa City 
Administration for the construction of its future 
new, complex and high rising Headquarters Building.
Awash Bank Jimma Building Inauguration Program
Agreement for Bale Robe Building Construction
   29   |     Annual Report 2019/20
Prosper with the Leading Private Bank! 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4.	 Corporate Social Responsibility
Awash Bank’s success over the long term is tied 
inextricably to the progress of the communities in 
which the Bank operates. Cognizant of the strategic 
importance of growing with the communities, 
the Bank has strengthened its Corporate Social 
Responsibility (CSR) initiatives through pledging 
financial 
donations 
to 
various 
organizations. 
Accordingly, during the closing celebration of the 
Silver Jubilee of Awash Bank and Awash Insurance 
Company on November 23, 2019, the sister 
companies have jointly donated Birr 20 million  to 
different  organizations. The beneficiaries of the 
donation, among others, are Ethiopian Red Cross 
Society, Amref Health Africa, Oromia Development 
Association, The Children Heart Fund of Ethiopia, 
and Christian Children Fund of Canada.
In the aftermath of COVID-19 outbreak, Awash 
Bank has assisted the most affected sectors of the 
economy by reducing the lending interest rate for 
a given period of time. Moreover, Awash Bank has 
assumed social responsibility and fully supported 
the fight against the outbreak of COVID-19 through 
donating Birr 10 million to the National Committee 
established to combat COVID-19; and donating 
over Birr one million to different organizations that 
support economically disadvantaged groups of 
society through availing food and sanitary items.
Ethiopian Red Cross Society
Ye Noah Merkab Ye AIDS Mekelakel Mahiber
Christian Children Fund of Canada
Oromia Development Association
 Annual Report 2019/20     |   30 
The Children Heart Fund of Ethiopia
Seedling Plantation at Sebeta-Debel Yohannes
Mountain in relation to the 25th Anniversary of AB and AIC
   31   |     Annual Report 2019/20
Prosper with the Leading Private Bank! 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
BEDR Foundation
 Donation in kind for kality Elderly Rehabilitation & Development Center
 Annual Report 2019/20     |   32 
5.	 Interest Free Banking (IFB) Sharia Advisory Committee’s Report For  
	
Financial Year 2019/20
Sharia Advisory Committee
Ustaz Sultan Aman Eba
Chairman
Mohammedhakim Ahmed (Dr.)
D/Chairman
“In the name of Allah, the most Compassionate, the most Merciful”
To the Bank’s Board of Directors and all stakeholders, including depositors:
Ustaz Hassen Abdulnasir Ali
Mamber
In compliance with the duties & responsibilities 
vested in us, in the Bank’s Shariah Advisory 
Committee Charter and the letter of appointment 
thereafter, we are required to ensure that Awash 
Bank’s IFB operations are in compliance with 
the Islamic Shariah principles as well as those 
required by NBE Directive No. SBB/72/2019, 
Article 2, Sub-article 2.2 in this regard. 
It has been our regular duties and responsibilities 
to conduct periodic review of products and services 
to make sure that IFB operational activities and 
transactions within the Bank and its IFB policies 
and procedures issued henceforth are in compliance 
with Shariah principles and requirements. To 
this end, we are required to issue and submit this 
report, which complies with the international best 
practices, to be published on the Bank’s annual 
financial report. 
Accordingly, Awash Bank is offering the following 
IFB services in fund mobilization, fund utilization 
and service-based products at its more than 466 
branches, among which 15 (fifteen) are full-fledged 
IFB Branches, designated as “IKHLAS”, which is 
brand name for the Bank’s IFB product.
All of the products are reviewed and certified as 
being Shariah-compliant.
•	
Wadiah saving, Student-Plus (Wadiah for 
 
	
education), Al-Kair and Labbaik - Wadiah savings 
 
	
accounts, 
•	
Wadiah current account (Amanah) 
•	
Unrestricted Mudarabah Investment accounts
•	
Murabaha Financing schemes (Cost + Mark-up), 
•	
Interest-Free Export Financing scheme (Qard) = 
 
	
Free Loans;
•	
Loan for Overseas Employment Agencies 
	
(Qard) = Free Loans; 
   33   |     Annual Report 2019/20
Prosper with the Leading Private Bank! 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
•	
IFB Trade Services, (Murabaha, Musharakah 
 
	
and Wakalah L/C)
•	
IFB Bank Guarantees (Kafalah). 
•	
Hawalah (Hiwalah), etc. services parallel with 
 
	
the conventional banking one.
We have reviewed the products listed above with 
their respective expected Shariah principles, the 
relevant contracts, transactions and IFB core 
banking introduced by Awash Bank during the year 
ended 30 June 2020. In addition, we have assessed 
the IFB policies and procedures adopted by the 
Bank, examined sample transactions, the relevant 
documentations, all information and explanations 
which we considered necessary and sufficiently 
provide us evidence to give reasonable assurance 
that Awash Bank operations have not violated the 
Shariah principles. 
In our opinion, generally, we, the Shariah Advisory 
Committee of Awash Bank, do hereby confirm that: 
1.	
The IFB products mentioned above, operational 
 
	
procedures, contracts, transactions and dealings 
 
	
entered into by the Bank during the year 
 
	
ended 30 June 2020 that we have reviewed are 
 
	
in compliance with the Shariah principles and 
 
	
the Shariah rulings related to IFB operations. 
2.	 Mudarabah deposits and financing (Profit-Loss 
 
	
Sharing) is not yet started and, thus, there is no 
 
	
allocation of profit and charging of losses 
 
	
relating to investment accounts; 
3.	 The profits generated by the Bank, from 
 
	
Murabaha and other services like Kafalah, are 
 
	
Shariah-compliant and there are no earnings 
 
	
that have been realized from sources prohibited 
 
	
by the Shariah principles and thus, no fund is 
 
	
expected to be disposed to charitable causes 
 
	
from the Bank itself. However, Birr 983,429.39 
 
	
collected from defaulted customers in the form 
 
	
of penalty must be given to Charity.  
4.	 Awash Bank during the year ended 30 June 
 
	
2020 is not required to pay zakat because its 
 
	
shareholders include non-Muslims also. 
Thank You (Jazakumullah Kair)!
On behalf of the Shariah Advisory Committee
       Chairman of the Shariah Advisory Committee              D/Chairman of Shariah Advisory Committee 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
	
Ustaz Sultan Aman Eba                                                 Dr. Mohammedhakim Ahmed
                       _________________________               __________________________               	
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, 20 July 2020.
 Annual Report 2019/20     |   34 
Partial View of IFB Branches Opening Ceremony
IFB Muamalat Brannch, Bethel
IFB BerWaquo Branch, Jigjiga
   35   |     Annual Report 2019/20
Prosper with the Leading Private Bank! 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IFB Huda Branch, Melka Rafu
IFB Hira Branch, Jimma
 Annual Report 2019/20     |   36 
   37   |     Annual Report 2019/20
Prosper with the Leading Private Bank! 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Annual Report 2019/20     |   38 
Prosper with the Leading Private Bank! 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   39   |     Annual Report 2019/20
 Annual Report 2019/20     |   40 
Prosper with the Leading Private Bank! 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   41   |     Annual Report 2019/20
 Annual Report 2019/20     |   42 
Prosper with the Leading Private Bank! 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   43   |     Annual Report 2019/20
 Annual Report 2019/20     |   44 
   45   |     Annual Report 2019/20
Prosper with the Leading Private Bank! 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Annual Report 2019/20     |   46 
   47   |     Annual Report 2019/20
Prosper with the Leading Private Bank! 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Annual Report 2019/20     |   48 
   49   |     Annual Report 2019/20
Prosper with the Leading Private Bank! 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Annual Report 2019/20     |   50 
   51   |     Annual Report 2019/20
Prosper with the Leading Private Bank! 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Annual Report 2019/20     |   52 
   53   |     Annual Report 2019/20
Prosper with the Leading Private Bank! 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Annual Report 2019/20     |   54 
   55   |     Annual Report 2019/20
Prosper with the Leading Private Bank! 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Annual Report 2019/20     |   56 
   57   |     Annual Report 2019/20
Prosper with the Leading Private Bank! 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Annual Report 2019/20     |   58 
   59   |     Annual Report 2019/20
Prosper with the Leading Private Bank! 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Annual Report 2019/20     |   60 
   61   |     Annual Report 2019/20
Prosper with the Leading Private Bank! 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Annual Report 2019/20     |   62 
   63   |     Annual Report 2019/20
Prosper with the Leading Private Bank! 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Annual Report 2019/20     |   64 
   65   |     Annual Report 2019/20
Prosper with the Leading Private Bank! 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Annual Report 2019/20     |   66 
   67   |     Annual Report 2019/20
Prosper with the Leading Private Bank! 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Annual Report 2019/20     |   68 
   69   |     Annual Report 2019/20
Prosper with the Leading Private Bank! 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Annual Report 2019/20     |   70 
   71   |     Annual Report 2019/20
Prosper with the Leading Private Bank! 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Annual Report 2019/20     |   72 
   73   |     Annual Report 2019/20
Prosper with the Leading Private Bank! 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Annual Report 2019/20     |   74 
   75   |     Annual Report 2019/20
Prosper with the Leading Private Bank! 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Annual Report 2019/20     |   76 
   77   |     Annual Report 2019/20
Prosper with the Leading Private Bank! 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Annual Report 2019/20     |   78 
   79   |     Annual Report 2019/20
Prosper with the Leading Private Bank! 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Annual Report 2019/20     |   80 
   81   |     Annual Report 2019/20
Prosper with the Leading Private Bank! 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Annual Report 2019/20     |   82 
   83   |     Annual Report 2019/20
Prosper with the Leading Private Bank! 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Annual Report 2019/20     |   84 
   85   |     Annual Report 2019/20
Prosper with the Leading Private Bank! 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Annual Report 2019/20     |   86 
   87   |     Annual Report 2019/20
Prosper with the Leading Private Bank! 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Annual Report 2019/20     |   88 
   89   |     Annual Report 2019/20
Prosper with the Leading Private Bank! 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Annual Report 2019/20     |   90 
   91   |     Annual Report 2019/20
Prosper with the Leading Private Bank! 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Annual Report 2019/20     |   92 
   93   |     Annual Report 2019/20
Prosper with the Leading Private Bank! 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Annual Report 2019/20     |   94 
   95   |     Annual Report 2019/20
Prosper with the Leading Private Bank! 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Annual Report 2019/20     |   96 
   97   |     Annual Report 2019/20
Prosper with the Leading Private Bank! 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Annual Report 2019/20     |   98 
   99   |     Annual Report 2019/20
Prosper with the Leading Private Bank! 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Annual Report 2019/20     |   100 
   101   |     Annual Report 2019/20
Prosper with the Leading Private Bank! 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Annual Report 2019/20     |   102 
   103   |     Annual Report 2019/20
Prosper with the Leading Private Bank! 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Annual Report 2019/20     |   104 
   105   |     Annual Report 2019/20
Prosper with the Leading Private Bank! 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Annual Report 2019/20     |   106 
   107   |     Annual Report 2019/20
Prosper with the Leading Private Bank! 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Annual Report 2019/20     |   108 
   109   |     Annual Report 2019/20
Prosper with the Leading Private Bank! 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Annual Report 2019/20     |   110 
   111   |     Annual Report 2019/20
Prosper with the Leading Private Bank! 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Annual Report 2019/20     |   112 
   113   |     Annual Report 2019/20
Prosper with the Leading Private Bank! 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Annual Report 2019/20     |   114 
   115   |     Annual Report 2019/20
Prosper with the Leading Private Bank! 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Annual Report 2019/20     |   116 
   117   |     Annual Report 2019/20
Prosper with the Leading Private Bank! 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Annual Report 2019/20     |   118 
   119   |     Annual Report 2019/20
Prosper with the Leading Private Bank! 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Annual Report 2019/20     |   120 
   121   |     Annual Report 2019/20
Prosper with the Leading Private Bank! 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Annual Report 2019/20     |   122 
   123   |     Annual Report 2019/20
Prosper with the Leading Private Bank! 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Annual Report 2019/20     |   124 
   125   |     Annual Report 2019/20
Prosper with the Leading Private Bank! 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Annual Report 2019/20     |   126 
   127   |     Annual Report 2019/20
Prosper with the Leading Private Bank! 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Annual Report 2019/20     |   128 
   129   |     Annual Report 2019/20
Prosper with the Leading Private Bank! 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Annual Report 2019/20     |   130 
   131   |     Annual Report 2019/20
Prosper with the Leading Private Bank! 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Annual Report 2019/20     |   132 
   133   |     Annual Report 2019/20
Prosper with the Leading Private Bank! 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Annual Report 2019/20     |   134 
Financial Highlight, Number of Branches and Employees In millions of Birr 
unless stated other wise
Source: AB’s Audited Accounts
 
*Including Margins held on L/C
 
** Including Provisions for Doubtful Loans& Advances
   135   |     Annual Report 2019/20
Prosper with the Leading Private Bank! 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ATMs’ Located at Awash Bank Branches in Addis Ababa
ABUWARE             
ADDIS KETEMA             
ADDISU GEBEYA              
ADEY ABEBA             
AFRICA ANDINET             
AFRICA AVENUE             
AIRPORT             
AKAKI              
AKAKI GEBEYA
AKAKI GELAN             
AKAKI KALITY             
ALEM BANK             
AMANUEL TOTAL             
ARADA GIORGIES             
ARAT KILO             
ASCO             
ASIRA SIMINT MAZORIA             
ASKCO ADDIS SEFER
AYAT TAFO
BALDERAS             
BAMBIS             
BEKLOBET             
BESHALE FIGA             
BETHEL             
BOLE             
BOLE 22             
BOLE 24
BOLE ASIRA SEBAT             
BOLE BULBULA
BOLE MEDHANEALEM  (2 ATMs)
BOLE MICHAEL             
BOURAYOU KETA             
BULGARIA MAZORIA             
BURAYU MARIAM
CHURCHIL ROAD             
CMC             
D’AFRIQUE             
DEJAZMACH BALCHA SAFO             
DESIE BER             
DIL GEBEYA             
DUBAI TERA             
ECA AKABABI 
EDGET 
ENDERASE 
ERTU LEBU 
FERENSAY LEGASION 
FINFINE     (3 ATMs)
FIT BER 
FURI  
GEFERSA NONO
GEJA SEFER 
GENET HOTEL 
GERJI 
GERJI GIORGES 
GFERSA GIJI
GLOBAL AKABABI 
GOF
A  GEBREAL 
GOF
A MEBRAT 
GOF
A SEFER 
GOJAM BER 
GORO BESHALE
GOTERA 
GULELE 
GULELE FINANCE  
GULELE PAULOS
GURD SHOLA 
GURD SHOLA JACKROS
HABTE G.DILDIY             
HANNA MARIAM
HARBO GUDO
HAYA  HULET MAZORIA
HAYA HULET WUHALIMAT 
HAYAT ADEBABAY
HAYAT ARABSA
HEAD OFFICE             
HURBU GUDO
IMPERIAL AKABABI
JACKROS
JEMMO 
JEMMO MICHAEL 
KAGNEW SHALEKA 
KALITI GEBIRIEL  
KALITI GUMRUK 
KARA KORE 
KARA MAZORIA
KARA ROAD             
KARALLO             
KARL SQUARE
KAZANCHIS 
KEBENA 
KECHENE CHILOT 
KIRKOS AKABABI 
KOKEB
KOKEB 
KOLFE             
KOLFE ATENA TERA
KOLFE LUKANDA
KORIYA HOSPITAL 
KOTEBE 
Kotebe 02
KUAS 
LAFTO 
LAMBERET 
LEBU 
LEGEHAR 
LEGETAFO 
LEMEN
LIDETA H
MEGENAGNA
MEGENAGNA ADEBABAY 
MEGENAGNA HAYA HULET 
MEHAL ARADA 
MEHAL GEBEYA 
MEHAL GOF
A 
MEKANISA             
MEKANISA ABBO 
MEKANISA KORE
MERKATO 
MESALEMIA 
MESKEL FLOWER 
MEXICO 
MICHAEL ADEBABAY
MIKYLILAND  
MILINIUM 
MOENCO 
NIF
AS SILK 
OLOMPIA 
PIASSA 
RUWANDA EMBASSY
SALLO GORA
SANFORD 
SANSUSSI
SARBET  
SARIES 
SARIES ADDIS SEFER 
SEBATEGNA 
SHALLA  
SHEGER 
SHEGOLE
SHIRO MEDA 
SIDAMO TERA 
SIDEST KILO 
SIGNAL 
STADIUM 
STADIUM ZURIA
SUMMIT 
SUMMIT 72
TEKILE HAIMANOT 
TEMENJA YAJ 
TORHAILOCH 
TRAFICKTSEFETBET 
URAEL 
URAEL NIGEST SEFER
WELETE             
WELLO SEFER             
WORKU SEFER
WOSEN SEFER
WUHALIMAT 
WUHALIMAT 22 
YARED 
YEKA 
YEKA ABADO ADEBABAY
YEKA ABADO G7
YERER BER  
YESH DEBELE SEFER 
YOSEPH
ZENEBWORK
BRANCH  NAME
BRANCH  NAME
BRANCH  NAME
BRANCH  NAME
 Annual Report 2019/20     |   136 
ATMs’ Located at Awash Bank Out Side Addis Ababa
ABA SENA 
ABAJIF
AR
ABAY MADO
ABOSTO
ADABA
ADAMA   
ADAMA 
ADAMA             
ADAMA RAS
ADEA (2 ATMS)
ADI HAQI
ADIGRAT
ADOLA
AGARO             
AGARO GOMMA
ALABA KULITO
ALAMATA
ALAMATA             
ALAMURA
ALELLTU
ALEMGENA
ALETA WONDO
AMBO
ANGER GUTE
ARBA MINCH
AREKA
ARERTI
ARSI NEGELE
ARSI ROBE
ASSASSA
ASSELA BR.
ASSOSA
AWASH SEBAT KILO
AWASHO
AWEDAY
AXUM
AYRA
AZEZO
BABILE
BAHIR DAR ( GHION )
BAHIRDAR 
BAKO
BALE ROBE 
BAMBASI
BATI
BATU (ZEWAY)
BEDELLE
BEDESSA
BEGI
BEKOJI
BERECH
BICHENA
BISHOFTU
BODITI
BOKE
BONGA
BOSSET 
BOTE
BUANBA WUHA
BULE HORA
BURE DAMOT
BURQA JATO
BUTAJIRA
CHAGNI
CHEFE DONSA
CHELENQO
CHILALO
CHIRO
CHORA
DAMBI (DEBRE ZEIT)
DANGELA
DEBRE BIRHAN
DEBRE MARKOSE
DEBRE TABOR
DEDERE
DEMBELA 
DENBI DOLO
DERA
DERA GUNDO MESKEL
DERARTU
DESSIE  
DILA             
DILLA
DIRE DAWA 
DODOLA
DOLOMENA 
DUKEM
EDAGA HAMUS
EDAGA MEKELLE 
EJAJI
ENJIBARA
ETEYA
FICHE
FINCHWHA
FINOTE SELAM
GAMBELLA
GAMBELLA NEW LAND
GANDA GARA
GAST SOLAR
GEDO
GELAN
GELEMSO
GERBA GURACHA
GIDA AYANA
GIDAMI
GIMBI 
GINCHI
GINIR
GIREGNE
GISH ABAY
GOBA 
GOBESSA
GODENA SELAM
GONBORA
GONDER
GONDER AZEZO
GONDER F
ASILEDES
GRAWA
GUDATU ARJO
GUDER 
GUDRU
GULISO
HAFETESA(D.DAWA)
HARAR 
HARER ARATEGNA SEFER
HARO SABU
HARO WOLABU
HAROMAYA
HARUF
A 
HAWASSA 
HAWASSA AREB SEFER
HAWASSA MENHARIA
HIRMATA
HIRNA
HOLETA
HOSSANA
HUMERA
INJIBRA             
JAWI
JERJAGA JARTTE
JIBRUK
JIGJIGA
JIGJIGA/ QALI
JIMMA 
JIMMA ARJO
JINKA
KECHEMA 
KEMISE
KERCHA
KEZIRA
KOBO
KOKA
KOMBOLCHA
LALIBELA
LEGEODA
LEKA
LIMU
LOGIA
MADA WOLABU
MAMBOOK
MARAKI
MECHARA
MEDE AGAME
MEKANESELAM
MEKELE
MEKELE JIBRUK 
MEKI
MENDI
BRANCH  NAME
BRANCH  NAME
BRANCH  NAME
BRANCH  NAME
MERHAWI
MERSA
METAHARA
METTU
MOJO 
MOTTA
MUGAD
MUGI
NEDJO
NEGELLE 
NEKEMTE
NOLE QABA
ODA BULEQE
ODA NEKEMTE
ODO LIBAN AMBO
KERSA
SABIEN SEFER BR.
SAR TERA
SEBETA
SEMERA
SEQOTA
SHAKISO
SHAMBU
SHASHEMENE
SHENEN GIBE
SHENO
SHESHENCHO
SHIRE ENDESELASE
SIBU SIREE
SOF OMER
SOFUMER
SULULTA
TABOR
TEPI
TONNA
TOSSA
TULU EJERSA
WARA JARSO
WECHECHA
WELAYITA SODO
WELENCHETI
WELLISO
WERABE
WERETTA
WESERBI
WOLDIYA
WOLKITE 
WONDOBASHA
WUKRO
YA’ABELO
YAYO
YEBU
ZENBABA
   137   |     Annual Report 2019/20
Prosper with the Leading Private Bank! 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Lobby ATMs
ABEBE ZELEKE HOTEL 
WELAYITA SODO
ADDIS ABABA INT'N AIRPORT TERMINAL-1
ADDIS ABABA
ADDIS ABABA INT'N AIRPORT TERMINAL-2
ADDIS ABABA
ADDIS GATE TRADING CENTER 
ADDIS ABABA
AFRICA UNION 
ADDIS ABABA
ALERT HOSPITAL
ADDIS ABABA
ARSI UNIVERSITY
CHILALO (ASSELA)
BERHANE ADERE MALL 
ADDIS ABABA
BETELHEM PLAZA 
ADDIS ABABA
BGI ATM01
ADDIS ABABA
BLENDANA HOTEL 
ASSOSSA
CAPITAL HOTEL 
ADDIS ABABA
CARE ETHIOPIA 
ADDIS ABABA
CATHOLIC RELIEF SERVICE
ADDIS ABABA
CENTURY MALL (2 ATMS)
ADDIS ABABA
CONCORD HOTEL
ADDIS ABABA
DH GEDA
ADDIS ABABA
EAST AFRICA BOTTLING S.C
ADDIS ABABA
ECA
ADDIS ABABA
ELIANA MALL 
ADDIS ABABA
ELILI HOTEL
ADDIS ABABA
ETHIOPIA HOTEL 
ADDIS ABABA
FILWUHA 
ADDIS ABABA
GAST SOLAR MECHANICS PLC ATM01
ADDIS ABABA
GHION HOTEL 
ADDIS ABABA
GRAND RESORT AND SPA 
BAHIR DAR 
HAILE RESORT 
BATU
HALELUYA HOSPITAL 
ADDIS ABABA
HARMONY HOTEL (2 ATMS)
ADDIS ABABA
HERMON CAFE 
ADDIS ABABA
HILTON ADDIS ABABA 
ADDIS ABABA
HOTEL SALAYISH 
MIZAN TEFERI
INTERCONTINENTAL  HOTEL
ADDIS ABABA
JAMBO IMPEX PLX 
HARAR RAS HOTEL
JAMBO IMPEX PLX (HARAR RAS HOTEL) 
ATM01
HARER HUNDENE
JIMMA UNIVERSITY TECHNOLOGY 
INSTITUTE  ATM01
JIMMA
JUPITER TRADING HOTEL 
ADDIS ABABA
KELELA BLD.
ADDIS ABABA
KENENISA HOTEL 
ADDIS ABABA
MAFI MALL 
ADDIS ABABA
MARRIOT HOTEL ATM02
ADDIS ABABA
NOAH REAL STATE 
ADDIS ABABA
PARADISE LODGE
ARBAMINCH
PARK PLAZA 
ADDIS ABABA
RAMADA HOTEL 
ADDIS ABABA
ROBERA COFFEE 
ADDIS ABABA
ROZETA HOTEL 
ADDIS ABABA
SABON BUILDING 
ADDIS ABABA
SIDIST KILO UNIVERSITY 
ADDIS ABABA
SIDRA HOTEL 
ADDIS ABABA
SNAP PLAZA 
ADDIS ABABA
SOUTH STAR HOTEL 
HAWASSA 
ST. MARY UNIVERSITY 
ADDIS ABABA
TEKLEHAIMANOT HOSPITAL 
ADDIS ABABA
TSEGA MALL 
ADDIS ABABA
WABESHEBELE HOTEL 
ADDIS ABABA
YOD ABYSSINIA 
ADDIS ABABA
ZEFMESH BLDG 
ADDIS ABABA
ATM Location                                      City
ATM Location                                      City
 Annual Report 2019/20     |   138 
No
Name
Telephone No.
Fax
 
Regional Office
011-530-3001/06
1
Ababil
0925-93-77-02
2
Abado Meskelegna
011-869-4044
3
Abuare
011-557- 6901/6836
011-557- 6910
4
Addisu Gebeya
011-126 -8100/8072
011-126- 8099
5
Aleltu
011-631-0710/0578
011-631-0632
6
Amist kilo
011-1154-14-57/58
7
Arada Giorgis
011-155- 6166/5938
011-155- 5800
8
Arat Killo
011-157- 0332/31/1714
011-157- 0335
9
Balderas
011-636-8141
011-636-8142
10
Chancho
011-188-0905/06
011-188-0923
11
Churchil road
011-126- 2025/2000/2017
011-126- 2018
12
Dale Dembel
011-667-9194/9539
011-667-9278
13
Debre Birhan
011-637 5061/71   
011-637 -5088
14
Dera Gundo Meskel
011-115-0707/0832
011-115-0674
15
Dessie Ber
011-667 -8022 /44/50
011-667 -8048
16
Ferensay Legasion
011-154-8082/90/84
011-154-8081
17
Fiche
011-135-2022 /77/69
011-135- 2187
18
Gerba Guracha
011-131- 0733/0689
011-131-0795
19
Gojam Ber
011-126- 8355/45
011-126- 8353
20
Gullele Finance
011-273- 2432/27
011-273 -2351
21
Gurd Sholla
011-646 -1679/47
011-646- 1231
22
Habte Giorgis
011-157- 8891/9593/91
011-157- 4546
23
Hayat Tafo
011-669-1502/1873
24
Kara allo
011-667-8906/667 8859
011-667-8894
25
Kara Mazoria
011-668- 0350/51
011-668- 0549
26
Kara Road
011-667 -0260/0189/0179
011-667 -0257
27
Kebena
011-154- 4006/08/07/15
011-154- 4012
28
Kechene
011-126-7677/70 13
011-126-6856
29
Kechene Chilot
011-126-3490/91
011-126-3492
30
Kotebe
011-647 -5400/645 6275
011-645- 6274
31
Kotebe 02
011-667-6286/6366
32
Lamberet
011-667- 5431/64/5397
011-667- 5427
33
Legetafo
011-829-0748/637 5076
011-637-5081
34
Megenagna
011-618 -2774/2669
011-618- 2772
35
Megenagna Adebabay
011-667- 3737/3637
011-667 -3799
36
Mehal Arada
011-111 -9226/15/34/1558
011-156- 0883
37
Mukaturi
011-134-0826/89
011-134-0615
38
Piazza
011-111- 9454/2470/1674
011-111 -2254
39
Ruphael
011-259 -1958/1863/1629
011-259- 1971
40
Sanford
011-154-3663/4529
011-154-4645
41
Semen Mazegaja
011-126-3740/011-126-3626
42
Sendafa Beke
011-638-7456/7782
011-638-7392
43
Sheger
011-155- 8938/157 0047
011-157- 0034
44
Shegole
011-259 -0346/0224/0475
011-259- 0379
45
Sheno
011-687- 0635
011-687- 0500
46
Shewa Robit
033-664-1686/2189
47
Shiro Meda
011-154-3513/5152
011-154- 3199
Awash Bank Branch Address by Region
                1. North Addis Ababa Region
   139   |     Annual Report 2019/20
Prosper with the Leading Private Bank! 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
48
Sidist Killo
011-126-1046/54
011-126- 0997
49
Signal
011-667- 2011/65
011-667 -2017
50
Sululta
011-161- 7134/38/46/41
011-161- 7154
51
Traffic Tsihfetbet 
011-661- 6454/618 9164
011-618 -8718
52
Wara Jarso
011-187- 0710/04
011-187- 0816
53
Weserbi
011-862- 5503
54
Wosen sefer
011-668-0065/67
011-667- 8239
55
Yared
011-126-1403/1553
011-126- 0188
56
Yeka
011-667- 4049/68/859 2248
011-667- 3520
57
 Yeka Abado
011-872 1957  
No
Name
Telephone No.
Fax
 
Regional Office
011-470-8426
011-470-2826
1
Africa Andinet
0112-73-31-01/02
2
Africa Avenue
011-371 -6102/6593
011-371- 6594
3
Alemgena
011-557- 0533/34/35
011-557- 0536
4
011-367-9095/64/9122
011-367 -9116
5
Amale IFB
0911-19-19-17
011-631-0632
6
Anfo
0919-19-51-56
7
Ayer Tena
0911-87-14-22
011-155- 5800
8
Bambis 
011-557-6976/73
 011-557-6971
9
Beklobet
011-466- 8575/2354
 011-416-6878
10
Bu'I
091-024-5038
011-188-0923
11
Bulgaria Mazoria
011-554- 0014/0292
011-554 -0311
12
Burka Wayu (Haile Garment)
011-471- 1861/1021
011-667-9278
13
Butajera
046-115-1028/0705
 046-115-0927
14
Dil Gebeya
011-372- 0820/17/18
011-372 -0839
15
ECA Akababi
011-558-9297/8637
011-558- 6478
16
Eihsan
011-154-8081
17
Enderase
011-557-6270/71
011-557- 6273
18
Ertu Lebu
011-471-3530
011-471-3865
19
Finfine
011-557- 0107/0200
011-557- 0113
20
Fitber
011-557 -2149/82
011-557- 2215
21
Furi
011-367- 9087/32/9108
011-367 -9092
22
Genet branch
011-554- 0256/43
011-554- 0033
23
Global Akababi
011-470- 2412/2368
011-470- 1368
24
Gofa Gebriel
011-467-4565/63/67
011-467- 4561
25
Gofa meberat haile
011-470- 3392/78/59/69
011-470- 3393
26
Gofa Sefer
011-465 -3691/466 9811
011-416- 0357
27
Gotera
011-467- 0392/896 3915
011-467 -0576
28
Hana Mariam
011-471-1297/71
011-471-1453
29
Hurbu
011-471-3327/39-24
011-471-3643
30
Jemmo Michael
011-369- 9602/9957
011-369- 8407
31
Kara Girar Sefer
0913-63-41-22
32
Karl Adebabay
011-384-8004/8154
011-667- 5427
33
Kazanchis
011-557-0756/57/22
011-557 -0683
34
Khidma
0913-10-18-77
011-618- 2772
35
Kirkos
011-554 -7583/81/85
011-554- 7582
36
Kirkos -45
011-470-5606
011-470-5839
2. South Addis Ababa Region
No
Name
Telephone No.
Fax
 Annual Report 2019/20     |   140 
37
Lafto
011-419 -6489/0763
011-419 -6488
38
Lebu
011-471- 2504/38
011-471 -2544
39
Legehar
011-553 -1948/554 77 65
011-551- 0867
40
Lemmon
011-363-03-59/60
011-154-4645
41
Mamulat (IFB)
42
Manal IFB)
0910-25-59-58
011-638-7392
43
Mehal Gofa
011-467- 1297/ 1574/91
011-467 -1281
44
Mekanisa
011-369-8348/8603
011-369-8325
45
Mekanisa Abo
011-369 0314/27/28
011-369 -0329
46
Meskel flower
011-466- 9393/467 1527
011-466- 9501
47
Mexico
011-557- 2179/2261
011-557 2259
48
Nifas Silk
011-442-0309/08/4679
011-442 -0958
49
Olompia
011-557- 1190/1240
011-557 -1188
50
Sarbet
011-372- 7391/7806
011-372- 7872
51
Saris
011-443-1272/37
011-443 -1358
52
SarisAddisu Sefer
011-440 0153/0675
011-440 -0685
53
Sebeta
011-338 -4101/15
011-338- 4102
54
Stadium
011-515- 6746/5115
011-550- 2920
55
Stadium Zuria
011-531-9102
011-531-9101
56
Temnja yaj
011-416 -2720/16
011-416 -2705
57
Tulu Bolo
011-342-1401/02
011-342-1400
58
Tulu Ejersa
011-471- 1735/13
011-471- 1597
59
Urael
011-554- 0830/31/32/33
011-554- 0836
60
Urael Nigist
011-554-1845/8664
011- 554-3049
61
Wechecha
011-380-4047/48
011-380-4033
62
Weliso
011-341 -3473/74
011-341- 3472
63
Wolete
011-380-0157/0057
011-380-3007
64
Wolkite
011-365-8169/8384
011-365-8168
65
World Bank
011-515- 3087
011-515 -0601
66
Yoseph 
0114-470-8882/0622
011-470-9056
67
Yusra
0913-49-0331
No
Name
Telephone No.
Fax
Regional Office
011-616-055675
011-663-7538
1
Adey Abeba
011-470 -7708/35/43
011-470 -7742
2
Airport
011-618- 0611/75
011-618- 0171
3
Akaki
011-435 -1672/434-0723
011-434- 3277
4
Akaki Kaliti
011-471 -6440/41
011-471 -6426
5
Akaki-Gebeya
011-471-5431/5159
6
Akaki-Gelan
011-471- 6503
011-471 6487
7
Beshale Figa
011-667- 7977/7750
011-667- 7885
8
Bole
011-618- 9522/24/26
011-662- 6387
9
Bole 17
011-660-9002/6632
011-660-0682
10
Bole 22 Road
011-662 8015/1686
011-618- 3996
11
Bole Bulbula
011-471- 4321
011-471- 4594
12
Bole Medihanealem
011-667 -0347/51
011-667 -0237
13
Bole Michael
011-639 -2022/05/21
011-639- 2023
14
Bole 24
011-667 3679
011-667 -3618
15
Bulbula 93 Mazoria
011-466-2354
16
Burka Shobe
0936-54-34-86
17
Camerron Avenue
011-666-2429/2528
18
CMC
011-667 -5188/55
011-667 5104
3. East Addis Ababa Region
No
Name
Telephone No.
Fax
   141   |     Annual Report 2019/20
Prosper with the Leading Private Bank! 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
19
Dukem
011-432- 0502/0342
011-432 -0523
20
Edget
011-629 -2526/2108
011-629 -2259
21
Gelan
011-471- 3470
011-471- 3764
22
Gerji
011-647 -6275/76
011-647- 6274
23
Gerji Georgis
011-639 4000/10
011-639 4002
24
Goro Beshale
011-666-0331/668-3482
25
Gurd Sholla
011-646-1647/1682
011-646- 1231
26
Gurd Sholla Jakros
011-639-5493/648 9244
011-661-7400
27
Harbu Gudo
011-668- 3168/3225
28
Haya hulet wuha limat
011-660-8443/86 73
011-660-0931
29
Hayahulet Mazoria
011-662-4667/68/618 9938
011-662- 6587
30
Hayat 49 Mazoriahora
0911-30-39-72
31
Hayat Adebbay
011-639-0305/23
011-639-0314
32
Hayat Arabsa
011-816 0110
33
Imperial Akababi
011-667-4673/4924
011-667-4838
34
Jakros
011-667-7069
011-667- 6618
35
Kaliti Gebriel
011-471- 7262/15/65
011-471- 7263
36
Kaliti Gumuruk
011-470- 7279/55/63
011-470- 7286
37
Kilinto
0913-14-95-08
38
Kokeb
011-667-4463
011-667-3802
39
Korea Hospital
011-629- 3836/3543
011-629 -3150
40
Megenagna 22
011-667-3382/3156
011-667-3363
41
Melka Sheno (Tulu Dimtu
011-471- 5646/6890
011-471- 5416
42
Millinnium Akababi
011-661- 0087/6838/5695
011-661-5550
43
Moenco
011-667-4448/20
011-667-4469
44
Rwanda Embassy Akababi
011-614- 6678/6758
011-614- 6640
45
Sallo Gora
011-869 -6464/471 6223
011-471-6197
46
Shalla Akababi
011-667- 3820/22/21
011-667- 3718
47
Summit
011-668-0971/0104
011-668-0148
48
Summit 72
011-639-1151/52
49
Wollo sefer
011-557-5855/4020
011-557-4324
50
Worku Sefer
011-471-7498/7949/ 7631
011-471-7631
51
Wuha Limat Akababi
011-618 -1200/9021
011-618 -7829
52
Yerer
011-667-7204/56
011-667-7247
4. West Addis Ababa Region
No
Name
Telephone No.
Fax
Regional Office
011-530-3002/16/20
1
Addis Ketema
011-275-8358/57 
011-277- 2483
2
Afdal
0112-73-31-01/02
3
Alem Bank Akababi
011-369- 4504/59/65
4
Amale IFB
0911-19-1917
5
Amanuel Total
011-273- 6009/46
011-273- 6032
6
Ambo
011-236- 4174/3377
011-236- 5669
7
Anfo
0919-19-5156
8
Asco
011-273- 0293/94
011-273- 0295
9
Asco Addis Sefer
011-273- 1631/30
10
Asrasemint Mazoria
011-279-1444/273 8960/56
011-279 -1364
11
Awtobis Tera
011-273- 4417/26/19
 011-273-4410
12
Ayer Tena
0911-87-1422
15
Bethel
011-349-1268/1304
011-349 -1135
No
Name
Telephone No.
Fax
 Annual Report 2019/20     |   142 
16
Burayu Keta
011-260-4620/41/54
011-260-4612
13
Burayu Mariam
011-260-4981/31
011-260-4959
14
D'Afrique 
011-557- 7067/14
011-557 -7028
19
Dejazmach Balcha Safo
011-530- 3111/10
011-530 3113
17
Dubi-Tera
011-273 -2281/90
011-273- 2282
18
Gefersa Guji
011-260-1852/1679
20
Gefersa nono
011-260- 1117/32
011-260-1133
21
Geja Sefer
011-557- 6237/44
011-557- 6232
22
Gesho Tera
011-273- 2752/42 
 011-273-2732
23
Ginchi
011-258- 1172/74
011-258- 1170
24
Gojam Berenda
011-273-3834 
011-273-3593
25
Gola Michael
011-126-3498/2201
26
Guder
011-282-0796/0814
011-282-0801
27
Gullele
011-278 -4926/31
011-278- 4927
28
Gullele pawulos
011-273-7936/35
29
Holeta
011-261- 0004/31
011-261- 0021
30
Jeldu
011-238-0597/0605
011-238-0582
31
Jemmo
011-348 -4007/6070
011-348 -6270
32
Kachisi
011-215-0530/62
011-215-0586
33
Kara Girar Sefer
0913-63-4122
34
Kara Kore
011-369- 3069/46
011-369 -3067
35
Ketena 2
011-383-5071/72
011-383-5073
36
Khidma (IFB)
0913-10-1877
37
Kolfe
011-275- 7235/36
011-277- 3376
38
Kolfe Atena Tera
011-273-9722/9119
39
Kolfe Likuanda 
011-273-9494/9492
40
Lideta
011-554- 6572/73
011-554- 6571
41
Mamulat (IFB)
42
Manal (IFB)
0910-25-5958
43
Mehal Gebeya
011-277- 9472/13
011-277 -9307
44
Mekanisa Kore
011-369- 8567/97
011-369-8395
45
Melka Gefersa
011-384-7658/7864
46
Merkato
011-277- 1666/275 87 33
011-213 -7136
47
Merkato Arategna Mazoriya
0913-07-8604
48
Merkato Kagnew shaleka
011-273-4542/12
011-273-4538
49
Merkato Tana
011-273-3598/28
011-273-2994
50
Mesalemiya
011-275-8437
011-278 -8195
51
Mierab Merkato
011-273 -4298
011-273- 4315
52
Mikilliland
011-273 -0341/98/57
011-273- 0426
53
Muger
011-218 0662/0371
011-218-0333
54
Oddo LIban
011-260-9925/6672
55
Quas Meda
011-276- 0343/45
011-276- 0349
56
Sansusi
011-373- 1940/18
011-373- 1221
57
Sebategna
011-277- 3342/43
011-277- 3270
58
Sengatera
011-557- 6839/75
011-557- 6880
59
Shera Tera
011-273- 5902/54
011-273- 5712
60
Sidamo Tera
011-278 -4118/94
011-278- 4117
61
Tegbare-ed
011-558-6723/9507
62
Tekle Haimanot
011-278 -9376
011-277 2732
63
Torhailoch
011-369 -1311/1293
011-369- 1208
64
Tulu Boke
011-369-7071/ 7848
65
Yeshi Debele
011-369-2392
011-369-0627
66
Yusra
0913-49-0331
67
Zenebework
011-369-7177/78
011-369-7226
No
Name
Telephone No.
Fax
   143   |     Annual Report 2019/20
Prosper with the Leading Private Bank! 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5. Adama Region
6. North   Region
No
Name
Telephone No.
Fax
Regional Office
022-212-6651/64
022-111-1382
1
Ada'a
011-433-8900/86
011-433- 8547
2
Adama
022-111- 8585/84
022-111- 5375
3
Adama Ras
022-211-6394
022-211-6393
4
Arerti
022-223- 0561/0664
022-223-0719
5
Arsi Robe
022-242-1765/1406
022-242-0042
6
Assela
022-331-2770/2875
022-331- 5622
7
Awash Sebat Killo
022-224- 0274/79
022-224- 0251
8
Batu
046-441- 2210/52
046-441- 2211
9
Bekoji
022-332-0655
023-332-0080
10
Berecha
022-112 -0481/05
022-112- 7867
11
Bishoftu
011-433- 5382/44
011-437- 0420
12
Boku Shanan  (Adama)
0912-94-05-47 
14
Boset
022-111 -9027/28
022-111 -9029
15
Bote
022-115- 0503/04
022-115- 0542
16
Chefe Donsa
022-451-05-10
022-451-05-14
17
Chilalo
022-331- 8274/7576
022-331- 8277
18
Cholle
022-454-0561/ 62
19
Dembela
022-110 -0621
022-110- 0622
20
Dembi
011-430-0563/64
011-430-0569
21
Dera
022-333-0000/09
022-333-0927
22
Derartu Adebabay
022-211- 6926
022-211- 5733
23
Eteya
022-335-0489
022-335-0818
24
Ganda Gara
022-212-1903/48
022-212-2339
25
Gobessa
022-446-0657
022-446-0657/93
26
Gololcha
0910268137
27
Huruta
022-334-1233/32
28
Kechema
022-111- 8302/06
022-111- 8303
29
Kersa
022-337-0770/71
022-337-0769
30
Koka
022-499-0192/0205
022-459-0192
31
Meki
022-118 -0044/08
022-118- 0740
32
Metehara
022-226-1213/1311
022-226-1317
33
Modjo
022-116- 0355/0286
022-116- 0473
34
Noor (IFB Adama)
022-111-2779
35
Olenchiti
022-113-1111/10
 022-113-1171
36
Sagure
0910-40-06-76
37
Sar Tera 
022-212-0414
022-212-0408
38
Siltana
0910-76-01-21
No
Name
Telephone No.
Fax
Regional Office
034-241-6522/9241
034-241-6369
1
Adhihaki
034-240-2034/1862
034-240-2546
2
Adigrat
034-445 -0330/0469
034-445 -0348
3
Alamata
034-774- 0782/35
034-774-0597
4
Axum
034-275-9490/7161
034-275-0477
5
Bati
033-553-2272/1808 
6
Buanbua Wuha
033-311- 9898
7
Dessie
033-111-2829/34
033-111- 2839
8
Edaga Hamus
034-773-0739/0795
034-773-0652
9
Edaga Mekele
034-240-5313/35/04
034-240-5287
10
Elala
 Annual Report 2019/20     |   144 
11
Godana Selam
034-440 -7044/6996
034-440-6997
12
Huda
0931-15-14-36
13
Humera
034-448- 1472
034-448 -1471
14
Jibruk
034-440- 4552
034-440 -4579
15
Kemise
033-554-1450/43
 033-554-1447
16
Kobo
033-334-1312/1310
033-334-1336
17
Kombolcha
033-551- 0839/77
033-551-0792
18
Lalibela
033-336- 1335/1410
033-336-1286
19
Logiya
033-550- 0060/75
033-550-0050
21
Meda Agame
034-245-4317/8718
22
Mekaneselam
033-220-1106/26
23
Mekele
034-241- 5212/45
034-241- 8966
24
Mersa
033-333-1036/46
25
Mugad
033-312-6358
034-312-1140
26
Sekota
033-540- 5420/19
27
Semera
033-366- 2813/4885
28
Shire Endeselasse
034-444 -0590/1238
034-444 -0594
29
Tossa
033-312-5612/7994
30
Woldiya
033-331- 1693/2579
033-331- 2619
31
Wukero
034-443- 0496/02
034-443- 0238
7. North West  Region
No
Name
Telephone No.
Fax
Regional Office
058-320-4168/2847
058-320-3148
1
Abay Mado
058-321-2081/3197
058-321-0110
2
Azezo
058-114 -1222/1163
058-114 -0879
3
B/Dar Ghion
058-320-9510/9692
058-320-8986
4
Bahir Dar
058-220- 0671
058-222 -1147
5
Bichena
058-665- 1580
6
Bure Damot
058-774-1073/1148
058-774-1196
7
Chagni
058-225 -0458/0179
058-225 -0532
8
Dangila
058-221-1820/1731
058-221-2143 
9
Debre Markos
058-771-2328
058-771- 4225
10
Debre Tabor
058-141- 0303/46
058-141 -0355
11
Este
058-447 16 98
058-447-16-18
12
Fasiledes
058-211 46 21
13
Fenote Selam 
058-775-2113/14
058-775-2115
14
Ginde Woin
0918-59-7298
15
GishAbay
058-226- 6467/3863
058-222- 0073
16
Gonder
058-111- 4867
058-111 -8044
17
Injibara
058-227- 0807/09
058-227- 0804
18
Jawi
058-278- 0401/02
058-278- 0403
19
Kidame Gebeya
0922-71-0665
20
Kuch
058-289-0445/46
21
Mambuk
058-263-05-67
22
Maraki
058-211 -5081/57
058-211- 5062
23
Merawi
058-330- 0988/0969
24
Metema Yohannes
058-555- 5651
058-555- 5509
25
Motta
058-661-1974/2074
26
Tana (B/Dar)
0905-20-9111
27
Tilili
0912-90-8010
28
Woreta
058-446-1641/1491
29
Zembaba (B/Dar)
058-320-6924
No
Name
Telephone No.
Fax
   145   |     Annual Report 2019/20
Prosper with the Leading Private Bank! 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8. South Region
No
Name
Telephone No.
Fax
Regional Office
046-212-6160
046-212-6702
1
Abaro
0912-99-87-04
2
Abosto
046-211 -5077
046-211- 5058  
3
Adaba
022-663-1222/65
022-663-1258
4
Adola Weyu 
046-335-0059/0607
046-335-0220
5
Alaba Kulito
046-556- 0124
046-556-0109
6
Alamura
046-212-70-96/63-08
7
Aleta wendo
046-224-0588         
046-224-0630 
8
Amanah (IFB Halaba)
0920-06-88-97  
9
Arbaminich
046-881- 2992
046-881 4605
10
Areka
046-552-1321/20
11
Arsi Negele
046-116- 0127
046-116- 0877
12
Asasa
022-336-0845
022-336-0819
13
Awasho
046-211-7422/5535
046-211-9840
14
Bale Robe
022-665- 1700
022-665 -1975
15
Bani (IFB Shashemene)
046-446-0197/211-1865/4998
16
Bansa Daye
046-337-0637/0638
17
Berekah (IFB Shashemene)
0910-04-20-20  
18
Bodeti
046-559-0965/10-00
19
Bule Hora
046-443 -0121
046-443 -0935
20
Dalo Mena
022-668-0039/21
022-668 -0540
21
Dilla
046-331-0370/43
046-331-4107
22
Dodola
022-666-0474/77
022-666-0429
23
Dolo Oddo
046-449-0414/ 0377
24
Durame
091-014-1616
25
Garo (Arba Minch)
091-610-3150
26
Gasera
011-557-0163/30
27
Ginir
022-664- 0065
022-664 -0449
28
Goba
022-661-2613/2929
022-661-4927
29
Gombora
046-178-67-57/8817
30
Haro Welabu (Dilla 2nd)
046-131-0445
31
Harufa
046-110 -0335/0610
046-110 -0543
32
Hawassa
046-220 -4819/4722
046-220- 4751
33
Hawassa Arab Sefer
046-212-3849
046-212-4811
34
Hawassa Menaharia
046-212- 4021/4162
046-212- 3621
35
Hosaena
046-555- 0684
046-555- 0694
36
Jara
0913-11-1053
37
Jinka
046-115-1862/00
046-775-1859
38
Kercha
046-324-2008
046-324-2004
39
Kofele
046-112-0978/0869
40
Meda Welabu
022-244-2068
41
Mena IFB WERABE
046-771-0875/44
42
Moyale
046-444-1791
047-444-1401
43
Negelle
046-445-2193/90
 046-445-2192
44
Sawla
046-777-1662
45
Shakiso
046-334-1399/1193
046-334-1348 
46
Shashemene
046-110- 6525
046-110- 0014
47
Shinshencho
046-339-0850/64
046-339-0874
48
Shone
0916-69-67-52
49
Sofomer
022-665 -2525/3117
022-665-0043
50
Tabor
046-212 -0034/56
046-212- 0068
51
Tona
0920-64-60-79
 Annual Report 2019/20     |   146 
52
Warabe
046-771-0600
046-771-0588
53
Wolayeta Sodo
046-551- 0743
046-551- 0706
54
Wondo Basha
046-222- 0427/0515
55
Yabello
046-446 -0887/0197
046-446- 0311
9. East region
10. West Region
No
Name
Telephone No.
Fax
Regional Office
025-411-8016
025-411-1546
1
Afatessa
025-411-0395/88
025-411- 0390
2
Awedaye
025-662 -0561/66
025-662-0593
3
Babile
025-665-0607/0614
025-665-0667
4
Bedessa
025-555-0151/0057
025-555-0169
5
Berwako (IFB) Jigjiga
0911-81-96-28
6
Boke
025-230- 0711/0469
7
Chelenko
025-335- 0586
025-335- 0708
8
Chiro
025-551-1121/1021
025-551- 1022  
9
Deder
025-333- 1299/68
10
Dire Dawa
025-111-4042/80
025-111- 4046  
11
Filtu
046-473-0538/48
12
Gelemso
025-552- 1328/14
13
Gode
025-776-1089/1504
025-776-1695
14
Grawa
025-334-0579/31
15
Harar
025-667-0760/666-0616
025-667- 0287
16
Harar Arategna
025-466-2707/8534
025-466-9859
17
Harar Hundene
025-466-94-86
18
Haromaya
025-661-0467
025-661-0431 
19
Hirna
025-441-1251/52
025-441-1253
20
Huda(IFB)
0931-15-14-36
21
Jigjiga
025-775- 2548/6588
025-775- 2072
22
Kali
025-278 -0270/94
025-278- 0261
23
Kezira
025-211-5222/3760
025-211-0883
24
Lega Odda
025-211-5360/8440
25
Mechara
025-557- 0561
025-557 -0563
26
Nahar (IFB D/Dewa)
0915-12-58-25
27
Sabean Sefer
025-112- 4879
025-111- 2133
28
Togochale
025-882- 0131
025-882- 0217
No
Name
Telephone No.
Fax
Regional Office
057-660-1263/64
057-660-1260
1
Aba Sena
057 771-2484
2
Amuru
057-639-0636
3
Anger Gute
057-634-0249
057-634-0328
4
Assosa
057-775- 1652
057-775- 1741
5
Ayira
057-577-0698/38
057-557-0555
6
Baco
057-665- 1465/21
057-665 -1494
7
Bambasi
057-441-0677/0734
057-441-0654
8
Begi
057-641- 0441
057-641 -0462
9
Burka Jato
057-660-8129/27
10
Chomen Guduru
0910-08-98-79
11
Dembi Dollo
057-555-2333/1651
057-555 -1277
12
Ejaji
057-550-0612/0602
057-550-0565
No
Name
Telephone No.
Fax
   147   |     Annual Report 2019/20
Prosper with the Leading Private Bank! 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
13
Fincha
057-664- 0151/0069
057-664- 0041
14
Gedo
057-227-0159/0070
057-227-0500
15
Ghimbi
057-771- 0066/0342
057-771- 1022  
16
Gida Ayana
057-773- 0691/56
057-773- 0676
17
Gidami
057-780-0800/01
057-780-0802
18
Gudatu Arjo
057-116-0617/0660
057-116-0666
19
Guduru
057-663-0610/11
057-663-0571
20
Guliso
057-778-0278/81
057-778-0286
21
Haro Sabu
057-556-0574/0622
057-556-0831
22
Hora Fincha
0928-6827-95
23
Jerdaga jarte
057-637-0476
24
Jimma Arjo
057-667-0515/31
25
Jimma Rare
0920-69-70-91
26
Kamashi
0911-59-84-96
27
Leka
057-661 -1433/02
057-661- 1439
28
Mendi
057-776 -0906/07
057-776- 0910
29
Mugi
057-779-0655/0533
057-779-0844
30
Nafi'i IFB (Nekemte IFB)
0911-26-33-32
31
Nejo
057-774- 0492/0287
057-774- 0345
32
Nekemte
057-661- 7092/90
057-661- 5474
33
Nole Kaba
057-632-0662/0714
057-632-0606
34
ODA
057-660-0920/1370
 057-660-3256
35
Oda Buluk
022-113-1111/1033
022-113-1171
36
Shambu
057-666- 0142/39
057-666- 0152
37
Sibu Sire
057-668- 0921/0917
11. South West Region
No
Name
Telephone No.
Fax
Regional Office
057-660-1263/64
057-660-1260
1
Aba Jifar
047-211-1733/2794
2
Ababuna
091-080-5293
3
Agaro
047-221- 1746
047-221- 1841
4
Bedele
047-445 -0865/1097
047-445- 0173
5
Bonga
047-331-1865/0691
047-331-2323
6
Chora
047-337-0706/05
7
Gambela
047-551-1814/67
047-551- 1869
8
Gambela New Land
047-151- 5279/3850
047-151- 0352
9
Gera
091-897-9090
10
Gomma
047-221-5347/48
11
Hirmata
047-211 -0035/33
047-211 -0044
12
Jimma
047-111 -2189/5976
047-111- 9412
13
Jiren
047-211-3708
14
Limmu Genet
047-224-0752/20
15
Masha
047-452-2651/53
16
Mettu
047-441- 2648/34
047-441- 4165
17
Mizan Teferi
047-135-9138/89
047-135-1879
18
Pugnido
047-465-0391/0699
19
Shebe
047- 1180789/75
20
Shenen Gibe
047-211- 7624/6693
21
Tepi
047-556-3489/66
047-556-2506
22
Yayo
047-333- 0765/51
23
Yebu 
047-226-0485
047-226-0560
No
Name
Telephone No.
Fax
12. Head Office Branch
No
Name
Telephone No.
Fax
1
Head Office Branch 
011- 662-0303 /0985
