 
 
 
1 
LICENSING AND SUPERVISION OF BANKING BUSINESS 
BANK CORPORATE GOVERNANCE  
DIRECTIVE NO. SBB/91/2024 
 
Whereas, prudent and effective corporate governance practices at banks are critical 
to the proper functioning of the banking sector and the economy as a whole;  
 
Whereas, good corporate governance plays a vital role in maintaining the safety and 
soundness of the financial system while also developing accountability regime that 
allocates the powers and responsibilities of a bank among the board and senior 
management; 
 
Whereas, good corporate governance should lead to balanced risk-taking practices 
that take into account the interests of key stakeholders; 
 
Whereas, the National Bank of Ethiopia aims to ensure that banks are soundly and 
prudently managed and directed;  
 
Now, therefore, in accordance with Article 13(1/a), Article 14(4/b-d/ and /f/) and Article 
66(2) of the Banking Business Proclamation No. 592/2008 (as Amended by 
Proclamation No. 1159/2019), the National Bank of Ethiopia has issued this Directive. 
 
1. Short Title 
 
This Directive may be cited as “Bank Corporate Governance Directive No. SBB/91/ 
2024”.  
 
2. Definitions  
For the purpose of this Directive, unless the context provides otherwise: 
 
2.1. “Board” means the governing body of a bank appointed by shareholders or 
other authorized body that has primary accountability for the governance and 
performance of the bank including strategy, overseeing management and 
protection of the shareholder and stakeholder interests. 
2.2. “Board Charter” means a document outlining the roles and responsibilities of 
the board of directors, powers of the board, various board committees and 
their roles, separation of roles between the board and management and the 
policies and practices of the board in respect to corporate governance 
matters. 
 
 
 
2 
2.3. “Chief Executive Officer” means a person, by whatever title that person may 
be referred to, who is primarily responsible for the day-to-day management of 
the affairs of a bank. 
2.4. “Corporate Governance” means the process and structure used to direct 
and manage the business and affairs of a bank towards enhancing business 
prosperity and corporate accountability with ultimate objectives of realizing 
long-term shareholders’ value, as well as customer, depositor, and other 
stakeholder interests. 
2.5. “Director” means any member of the board of directors of a bank, by 
whatever title the person may be referred to. 
2.6. “Employee” means a chief executive officer, a senior executive officer or any 
other person who is appointed or hired by a bank to carry out its day-to-day 
operations. 
2.7. “Financial Institution” means a bank, an insurance company, a reinsurer, a 
microfinance institution, a microinsurance company, payment instrument 
issuer, payment system operator, a capital goods finance company, a money 
transfer institution, a postal money transfer institution or such other similar 
institution as determined and licensed by the National Bank. 
2.8. “First Degree of Consanguinity or Affinity” means spouse, children and 
parents. 
2.9. “Independent Director” means a non-executive director that has no family 
of first degree consanguinity relationship or business, professional or 
commercial relationship with the bank, and is neither part of senior 
management nor involved in the day-to-day operations of the bank. An 
independent director is an experienced board member that is not under any 
undue influence, internal or external, political or ownership that would impede 
his/her ability to exercise objective judgment.  
 
Candidates who would not normally be considered to be an independent 
director include natural persons who are:  
2.9.1. a direct or indirect shareholder, a director, a chief executive officer, 
or a senior executive officer of a bank and/or the spouse or relative 
in the first degree of consanguinity or affinity of such shareholder, 
director, chief executive officer, or senior executive officer, or 
2.9.2. a shareholder, director, chief executive officer, senior executive 
officer of a company that has any contractual obligation towards 
the bank; 
2.9.3. involved, either directly or indirectly, in any legal proceedings or 
out-of-court disputes against the bank, the parent undertaking or 
their subsidiaries; 
 
 
 
3 
2.9.4. having any business, professional or commercial relationship with 
the bank over the past two years; and 
2.9.5.  having any financial obligations towards the bank in an amount 
cumulatively above Birr fifty (50) million. 
2.10. “Influential Shareholder” means a person who holds directly or indirectly two 
percent or more of the total subscribed capital of a bank. 
2.11. “National Bank” means the National Bank of Ethiopia. 
2.12. ‘‘Non-executive Director’’ means an individual not involved in the day-to-
day management and not a full-time salaried employee of a bank or of its 
subsidiaries.  
2.13. “Non-influential Shareholder” means any person who holds directly or 
indirectly less than two (2%) percent of the total subscribed capital of a bank. 
2.14. “One Term” means a period not exceeding three (3) years. 
2.15. “Person” means any natural or juridical person. 
2.16. “Person with Significant Influence” are influential shareholders, directors, 
chief executive officer and senior executive officers of a bank. 
2.17. “Related Party Transaction” means any transaction with related parties as 
defined by the relevant Directive.  
2.18. “Risk Management Function” means the business process that clearly 
identifies and measures inherent and significant risks of a bank and draws a 
strategy, policy and procedure to mitigate such risks, as defined by relevant 
Directives of the National Bank. 
2.19.  “Senior Executive Officer” means any officer of a bank who is managing two 
or more work units and is accountable to the chief executive officer or is 
directly reporting to the board of directors and includes positions at a level of 
deputy to chief executive Officer. 
2.20. “Senior Management” means the chief executive officer, the senior 
executive officers, and any other official, as may be defined by individual 
bank, responsible for day-to-day running of a bank. 
2.21. “Minority Shareholders” means a person or group of persons who cannot 
exercise the powers of a company or control its affairs. 
2.22. 
“Controlling Shareholder” means a person who is the beneficial owner of or 
is able to exert control over thirty percent (30%) or more of the shares of the 
organization. 
2.23. 
“Sustainability” refers to social and environmental sustainability, as well as 
economic sustainability where it intersects with environmental and social 
sustainability. Sustainability information is also referred to as non-financial 
information. 
 
 
 
4 
2.24. any expression in the masculine gender includes the feminine and/or juridical 
persons. 
 
3. Scope of Application 
 
3.1. 
This Directive shall be applicable on all banks operating in Ethiopia. 
3.2. In exceptional cases and with valid justification acceptable to the National 
Bank, banks may apply to the National Bank to defer the application of certain 
provisions of this Directive. 
3.3. A bank owned by the Government may apply Articles 6, 7 and 9 in due 
consideration of relevant laws. 
 
4. General Principles 
 
4.1. 
Effective corporate governance of banks and the way they conduct their 
business is critical to the proper functioning of the banking sector and the 
economy as a whole.  
4.2. The primary objective of corporate governance is to develop an 
accountability framework that allocates the powers and responsibilities by 
which the business and affairs of a bank are carried out by its board and 
senior management.  
4.3. A secondary objective is also to safeguard stakeholders’ interest in conformity 
with public interest on a sustainable basis.  
4.4. Among stakeholders, particularly with respect to banks, shareholders’ interest 
would be secondary to depositors' interest. 
 
5. Corporate Culture and Values 
 
5.1. 
A bank shall start its corporate governance framework by instituting a 
corporate culture and a set of values around responsible and ethical behavior, 
including risk culture, and legal and ethical conduct throughout the bank.  
5.2. Corporate culture and value shall be set by the board and senior management 
and communicated to the rest of the organization, through a code of conduct 
and code of ethics that clearly define acceptable behavior. 
5.3. Senior management shall institute a whistleblower policy and process 
overseen by the board that allow employees to report ethical and illegal issues 
confidentially without fear of reprisal and ensures that material concerns are 
thoroughly addressed. 
 
 
 
5 
5.4. A bank shall commit at the highest level of the organization to integrate 
sustainability factors in their risk management processes and oversight, 
focusing both on financing activities and operations.  
5.5. A bank shall commit to long-term economic development and the 
sustainability of its financing and operating activities, in line with National 
Sustainable Development Goals. 
 
6. Duties of Directors 
 
All Directors have a duty to: 
 
6.1. 
act in good faith and with utmost commitment to promote the success of the 
bank. In this regard, a director shall give due regard to the long-term interests 
of the bank, the interests of the bank’s employees, depositors and creditors, 
and the impact of the bank’s operations on the community and the 
environment; 
6.2. exercise independent judgment in the exercise of his responsibilities, as 
defined in the relevant law;  
6.3. discharge his responsibility with care, skill and diligence, as defined in the 
relevant law. A director shall be liable for damages caused to the bank and 
shareholders due to lack of care or diligence on his part. A director shall  avoid 
the approval of any transaction that is contrary to the bank’s own policies, the 
regulatory requirements of the National Bank and other applicable laws; 
6.4. comply with relevant laws and regulations, National Bank Directives, and 
corporate values and policies of the bank;  
6.5. address all issues and problems on a timely basis, and prevent illegal or 
unethical actions such as bribery and corruption inside and outside the bank; 
6.6. disallow behaviors that could result in any improper or illegal activities in the 
bank, such as money laundering, fraud, bribery or corruption. The board shall 
also discourage excessive risk-taking activities and self-dealing and 
acceptance of gifts or favors; 
6.7. use their position, bank information and bank assets properly. Directors shall 
not use their position, information acquired by virtue of position they hold, to 
obtain an advantage for themselves or someone else. Directors shall not 
misuse bank’s assets except in accordance with the terms on which they are 
provided;  
6.8. maintain the confidentiality of the bank’s and third party’s information. 
Confidential information received by a director in the course of the exercise 
of their duties remains the property of the bank and it is improper to disclose 
 
 
 
6 
it, or allow it to be disclosed, unless that disclosure is authorized by 
responsible organ of the bank or permitted by other relevant laws. Directors 
shall maintain appropriate level of confidentiality at all times with respect to 
information or data pertaining to the bank’s customers, suppliers and 
employees; 
6.9. act fairly and impartially. Directors shall avoid bias, discrimination, caprice or 
self-interest and  shall demonstrate respect for others by acting in a 
professional and courteous manner; and 
6.10. act with honesty and integrity. Directors shall be truthful and transparent in 
their dealings and use their power responsibly. 
 
7. Board of Directors’ Size and Composition 
 
7.1. 
Without prejudice to the provisions of the Commercial Code on the  minimum 
number of  directors,  due to the special nature of deposit-taking institutions, 
which gives them an added responsibility of safeguarding the interests of 
depositors, the National Bank requires a bank, to have at least nine (9) 
directors. To be effective, the board of directors shall have qualifications and 
experiences that match the complexity, the size, the scope and operations of 
the bank. 
7.2. A board shall include directors who as a group provide a balance of skill, 
diversity and expertise, who collectively possesses the necessary qualification 
commensurate with the size, complexity and risk profile of the bank. The 
mixtures of core competencies include banking, finance, accounting, 
management, 
economics, 
legal, 
business 
administration, 
auditing, 
information technology, investment management and sustainability. The 
qualifications and experience of all board members shall at a minimum meet 
the requirements set by the National Bank. 
7.3. The board of directors of a bank shall be composed as follows: 
7.3.1. 1/3rd of the directors shall be nominated and elected separately by 
non-influential shareholders; 
7.3.2. 1/3rd of the directors shall be nominated and elected by all 
shareholders; and 
7.3.3. 1/3rd of the directors shall be independent directors, nominated by 
the existing board of directors and elected by all shareholders. 
7.4. Shareholders of a bank shall ensure that there is no single gender 
representation in the bank’s board. To this end, they shall ensure that at least 
two (2) female are elected to the board. The board shall enact a policy to 
ensure the achievement of diversity in its composition. Diversity applies to 
 
 
 
7 
academic qualifications, technical expertise, relevant industry knowledge, 
experience, and gender. 
7.5. A maximum number of two (2) bank employees (including the chief executive 
officer and senior executive officers, but excluding company secretary) , may 
be elected to the board. However, such employees cannot be chairperson of 
the board of the bank.  
7.6. In order to exercise its duties of monitoring and overseeing managerial 
performance, preventing conflicts of interest and balancing competing 
demands on the bank, it is essential that the board is able to exercise objective 
judgment.  
7.7. 
Notwithstanding the provision provided in the Commercial Code, the board 
of directors shall have a chairperson and vice chairperson. The chairperson 
and vice chairperson shall be elected by a majority of all directors. 
 
8. Conflict of Interest  
 
8.1. 
The board shall put in place a policy to manage conflict of interest. The bank 
shall maintain a register of declared conflict of interest. 
8.2. The board chair, ahead of every board meeting, shall call upon all directors 
to declare if there are any conflict of interests related with the agenda items 
being discussed. 
8.3. A director of a bank shall avoid a situation in which he has a direct or indirect 
interest that conflicts, or possibly may conflict, with the interests of the bank, 
as described in relevant law.  
8.4.  A director shall inform the board of directors of any situation that may involve 
a conflict of interest between his own and the bank’s interest. Where a 
director of a bank is in any way, directly or indirectly, interested in a proposed 
transaction, contract entered into or any other relationship with the bank, he 
shall declare the nature and extent of that interest to the other directors. 
Declarations shall be made as soon as the existence of a situation that could 
give rise to a conflict of interest is known.  
8.5. No bank, director, or employee may carry out any transaction under conflict 
of interest that is contrary to the bank’s own policies, the regulatory 
requirements of the National Bank, Commercial Code and other applicable 
laws 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
9. Appointment of Directors 
 
9.1. 
Directors shall be nominated and elected based on board appointment policy 
and procedures of a bank, as approved by the general shareholders meeting. 
Such policies and procedures shall incorporate relevant provisions of this 
Directive related to board appointment. 
9.2. At a general shareholders meeting where the board of directors get elected, 
the first item on the agenda shall be to appoint an ad hoc board nomination 
and election committee responsible for nominating shareholders for election 
to the board. The committee shall be composed of five (5) members and shall 
not constitute current board members, or employees of the bank. At least two 
(2) of the nomination and election committee members shall be non-
influential shareholders. 
9.3. One month prior to the general shareholders’ meeting, company secretary of 
a bank shall publish the board nomination and election criteria to 
shareholders through widely reaching media including newspapers, bank’s 
website, broadcast and other electronic channels as necessary.  
9.4. A bank, prior to general shareholder meeting, shall disclose and adequately 
inform its shareholders description of the procedures to be followed for 
nominating directors.  
9.5. The nomination and election committee shall receive the nominations from 
the shareholders on the date of the general shareholders’ meeting.  
9.6. All nominations shall include a brief description of the nominee’s professional 
qualification and experience, and indicate which shareholder is nominating 
the nominee. A shareholder may nominate himself or herself.  
9.7. A legal person may be appointed to the board of directors in line with the 
relevant provisions of the Commercial Code. Where a person nominated is a 
legal person, a natural person who represents this legal person on the board 
(the representative) shall be identified during the nomination process to 
ensure that the person representing the shareholder fulfills the criteria set by 
the National Bank for board membership. In a situation where the 
representative cannot be identified during the nomination process; the legal 
person shall assign a representative who shall fulfil the National Bank's 
requirement in due course.  
9.8. All nominees that the nomination and election committee receive from 
shareholders must meet the qualifications and experience required by the 
National Bank. The nomination and election committee shall adequately 
inform the shareholders about board election criteria prior to the conduct of 
board nomination process.  
 
 
 
9 
9.9. The nomination and remuneration committee of the board of directors, in due 
observance of related criteria, shall recruit and propose nominees, whose 
number shall at least be twice the number of independent board members to 
be elected. The board of directors will then handover the list of nominees for 
independent directors to the nomination and election committee.   
9.10. 
 The nomination and election committee, shall receive and prepare three (3) 
lists of nominees, as per the following order: 
9.10.1. List 1: Nominees for 1/3rd of the board seats reserved for non-
influential 
shareholders, 
for 
election 
by 
non- 
influential 
shareholders; 
9.10.2. 
 List 2: Nominees for 1/3rd of the board seats reserved for all 
shareholders, for election by all shareholders; and 
9.10.3. 
 List 3: Nominees for 1/3rd of the board seats reserved for 
independent directors, for election by all shareholders. 
9.11. The general meeting shall vote separately for each nominee, on each list. Only 
non-influential shareholders may vote for the nominees in List 1. All 
shareholders may vote for List 2 and List 3. The nominees with the largest 
number of votes will be appointed. Nominees who were not successful shall 
be included for each category on a waiting list for consideration for 
appointment by the board in the event of future vacancies on the board. 
9.12. If a bank has no influential shareholder, election for board shall be conducted 
by all shareholders. 
9.13. The board of directors of government-owned banks shall be appointed in 
compliance with the relevant law under which they are governed. 
9.14. Notwithstanding the provision stated above, board of directors appointed for 
a government-owned bank shall be presented to the National Bank for 
conduct of fit and propriety assessment and approval.  
 
10. 
Conduct of Board Election by Authorized Bodies 
 
10.1. Where the National Bank decides to conduct board election, the process shall 
proceed in line with sub-articles 12 (1) (b) and (2) of the Banking Business 
Proclamation number 592/2008 (as Amended by Proclamation number 
1159/2019). 
10.2. Where a court of law, external auditors or any other organ authorized by law 
orders to carry out or decides to conduct board election, the process shall 
proceed in line with applicable laws. 
 
11. Board of Directors 
 
 
 
10 
 
11.1. 
A bank shall be led by an effective and entrepreneurial board of directors, 
whose role is to promote the long-term sustainable success of the bank, 
generating value for shareholders and contributing to wider society.  
11.2. The board shall ensure that the necessary resources, policies and practices 
are in place for the bank to meet its objectives and measure senior 
management’s performance against those objectives. 
11.3. The board shall establish the bank’s values and strategy, and ensure its 
alignment with its culture. A director shall act with integrity, lead by example, 
and promote the desired culture.  
11.4. Approval by the National Bank and Term of Office 
 
11.4.1. Appointment of directors shall be subject to approval by the 
National Bank in accordance with the requirements stipulated 
under relevant National Bank Directives.  
11.4.2. A bank shall submit application and relevant documents to the 
National Bank for approval of directors within twenty (20) working 
days from the date of their election. 
11.4.3. The National Bank shall decide on the application for approval 
within fifteen (15) working days from the date of receipt of all 
documents as required under sub-article 11.4.2 of this Article. 
11.4.4. The term of a board shall be counted from the date the ordinary 
general meeting of shareholders elected the board. 
11.4.5. A person may not serve either on his own behalf or representing 
any other shareholder as agent, or by whatsoever means, as a 
director of the bank for more than six (6) consecutive years. 
However, he may be re-elected after a lapse of six consecutive 
years.  
11.4.6. Notwithstanding sub-article 11.4.5 of this Article, if the ordinary 
general meeting of shareholders of a bank wishes to maintain 
continuity in the board and re-elect some of the existing board 
members, it may re-elect such directors, for only one (1) more term. 
The number of board members so re-elected shall, however, be 
limited to a maximum of one-third of the board seats of the bank.  
11.4.7. Where the surviving directors are less than half of the board of 
directors, they shall convene a general meeting to appoint other 
directors. 
 
 
 
11 
11.4.8. The term of office of the outgoing directors of a bank may not 
terminate until written approval for appointment of the incoming 
directors is granted by the National Bank. 
 
11.5. Training 
11.5.1. A bank shall give training, at least once a year, to directors on 
priority basis in areas of financial analysis, corporate governance, 
applicable laws, regulations, Directives, risk management and 
internal control.  
11.5.2. A bank shall provide formal induction program for new directors 
within three (3) months of their appointment. 
11.5.3. A bank shall file certificate of training of each member of the board 
to the National Bank for validation of its compliance with sub article 
11.5.1 of this Article. 
 
11.6. Board Meetings 
11.6.1. The board shall establish rules for conducting board meetings in a 
board charter. 
11.6.2. A board meeting shall be held at least once in a quarter  on the 
date and at the venue fixed in accordance with the rules for manner 
of conducting board meetings. 
11.6.3. The board may hold virtual meetings on an extraordinary basis, as 
long as the rules and procedures are laid out in the board charter.  
11.6.4. The board may invite to board meetings senior officials or other 
staff that it deems necessary.  
11.6.5. The board shall fix regular meeting days and venue. In all regular 
meetings (excluding urgent meetings), the chairperson or the 
company secretary shall serve formal notice of meeting to each 
director, together with agenda items, at least seven (7) days earlier 
than the meeting day. 
11.6.6. Board members are expected to commit to their duties and to 
arrive for board meetings fully prepared to discuss the agenda. 
Board members shall attend in person at least seventy five percent 
(75%) of the board meetings of a bank within a financial year.  
11.6.7. The board is required to take action in cases where the condition 
in sub-article 11.6.6 is not met. Actions the board can take include 
a recommendation to the shareholders meeting to remove that 
director from the board.  
 
 
 
12 
11.6.8. The board shall ensure all minutes of its meetings are properly 
recorded, signed, sequentially numbered, and safely kept along 
with other relevant documents. 
11.6.9. Board remuneration shall be paid to a director in proportion to his 
attendance at board meetings during the year.  
 
11.7. Board Responsibilities  
The board of directors of a bank has the ultimate responsibility for the bank’s 
business strategy and financial soundness, key personnel decisions, internal 
organization and governance structure and practices, and risk management 
and compliance obligations. The board may delegate some of its functions, 
though not its responsibilities, to board committees, including the Audit 
Committee, the Risk Management and Compliance Committee, and the 
Nomination and Remuneration Committee and other committees as the case 
may be.  
 
Without prejudice to the duties and responsibilities stated in other applicable 
laws, regulations, National Bank Directives, and memorandum of association, 
as well as, resolutions of shareholders, the board of the bank shall at least be 
responsible for: 
 
11.7.1. approving the strategy of the bank, based on a proposal from the 
chief executive officer; 
11.7.2. approving the bank’s annual business plans and budgets; 
11.7.3. approving bank policies; 
11.7.4. approving the risk appetite statement, based on the proposal of the 
chief risk officer; 
11.7.5. overseeing risk management and internal controls of the bank, 
ensuring the establishment of an appropriate risk management 
framework, and setting the risk appetite of the bank; 
11.7.6. proposing external auditors and their service fee to the general 
meeting 
of 
shareholders 
for 
appointment, 
based 
on 
recommendations from the Audit Committee; 
11.7.7. selecting and appointing chief executive officer, and overseeing his 
performance; 
11.7.8. appointing senior executive officers recommended by Nomination 
and Remuneration Committee; 
11.7.9. ratifying the appointment of chief internal audit, chief risk officer, 
and chief compliance officer who are qualified and competent with 
 
 
 
13 
integrity, to administer the affairs of the bank effectively and 
efficiently, or removing the same where they fail to be fit and 
proper; 
11.7.10. 
setting and actively overseeing a remuneration structure for the 
chief executive officer and senior executive officers, based on 
recommendations from the Nomination and Remuneration 
Committee. The remuneration structure shall support sound 
corporate governance, shall establish appropriate incentives that 
are aligned with prudent risk taking and sustainability goals, shall 
be consistent with the long-term interest and the financial 
soundness of the bank, and shall be effective in addressing 
misconduct that potentially result in losses; 
11.7.11. ensuring the operation of the bank is run prudently, and in 
compliance with relevant laws, regulations, policies, and 
procedures; 
11.7.12. approving equity investment decisions or agreements related to 
acquisition and disposal of fixed assets and technology which have 
material nature, as may be defined in the internal policy of the bank; 
11.7.13. approving material related party transactions, in line with the 
requirements of the National Bank Directive; 
11.7.14. 
developing succession plans for senior management, with support 
from the Nomination and Remuneration Committee. 
11.7.15. 
establishing and ensuring the effective functioning of various board 
committees including, when applicable, Audit Committee, Risk 
Management Committee and Nomination and Remuneration 
Committee, which shall report their resolutions to the full board; 
11.7.16. 
assessing annually the effectiveness of the board, its committees, 
and individual directors in carrying out their responsibilities and 
reporting the outcomes to the annual ordinary general meeting of 
shareholders and the National Bank; 
11.7.17. ensuring the capital and liquidity adequacy of the bank on an on-
going basis; 
11.7.18. 
preventing and managing conflicts of interest in the bank by 
putting in place sound policies and implementing them, where 
conflict of interest refers to a circumstance where a person’s 
activities or interests are advanced at the expense of the bank; 
11.7.19. 
establishing clear policies for shareholder relations with the bank 
and at least annually reviewing practices, aimed at clearly 
 
 
 
14 
communicating the goals, strategies and achievements of the bank 
to the shareholders; 
11.7.20. monitoring management performance by a performance 
management system and setting key performance indicators, 
including those mentioned in sub-article 11.7.19 of this  Article; 
11.7.21. developing transparent policy, rules and procedure for board 
nomination and election in consideration of industry standard and 
requirements stipulated in this Directive and submit to the general 
meeting of shareholders  for review and endorsement; 
11.7.22. establishing an appropriate risk governance framework that 
includes well defined organizational responsibilities for risk 
management, satisfying three lines of defense principles; 
11.7.23. reviewing and approving lines of responsibilities, delegating 
authorities, segregating duties and accountabilities for board of 
directors and senior management members; 
11.7.24. reviewing and approving a code of conduct for the board and 
senior management; 
11.7.25. ensuring the establishment of a code of conduct for the 
employees of the bank; 
11.7.26. establishing a formal induction program and ensuring that every 
in-coming board director is inducted and provided with necessary 
orientation in the area of the bank’s business; 
11.7.27. reviewing level of implementation of the codes of conduct through 
undertaking internal, as well as external monitoring and 
assessment,  establishing and communicating corporate culture 
and value, including staff training programs developed to 
encourage implementation; 
11.7.28. exercising oversight over the bank’s exposure and response to 
sustainability-related risks and opportunities, review policies, 
strategies, risk management, and targets set by management, and 
assess the performance of the organization against its targets; 
11.7.29. clearly defining the roles and responsibilities of senior 
management, for the management of sustainability-related risks 
and opportunities; 
11.7.30. ensuring that sustainability-related risks and opportunities are 
integrated in internal controls and compliance, including risk 
management and processes to ensure the integrity of reported 
sustainability information; 
 
 
 
15 
11.7.31. ensuring an effective internal audit system, staffed with qualified 
personnel to perform internal audit functions (covering at least 
financial, operational, legal, technology and management audit) is 
put in place; 
11.7.32. ensuring that appropriate management information system is 
established to produce accurate, complete, relevant and timely 
information on the performance of the bank; 
11.7.33. monitoring stakeholder engagement process and ensuring that 
stakeholder concerns and expectations are integrated in the bank’s 
strategy; 
11.7.34. developing strategies and suitable policies to manage relations 
with different stakeholder groups, including a program that allows 
bank staff and other stakeholders to report complaints (i.e.,  
“Whistleblower” policy); and 
11.7.35. adopting a clear governance framework for the bank including 
units, branches, district /regional offices, or other legal entities, and 
manage the risk associated with complex or opaque organizational 
structures.  
 
11.8. Board Charter and Description of Authority 
11.8.1. The board shall adopt a board charter that provides a formal 
description of matters specifically reserved for its decision as 
provided in the bank’s internal policy to ensure that the direction 
and control of the bank is firmly retained in its hands. 
11.8.2. The description of matters referred to under sub-article 11.8.1 of this 
Directive shall, at a minimum, include the following matters: 
a) acquisitions and disposals of equity investment, fixed assets 
and technology of material nature as may be defined by board 
of directors; 
b) authority level for core functions of the bank; and 
c) approval on corporate policies on all matters, at a minimum: 
i. board charter; 
ii. committee charters; 
iii. strategy; 
iv. compliance control policy; 
v. credit policy; 
vi. conflict of interest management; 
vii. human resource management; 
viii. investment; 
 
 
 
16 
ix. domestic and foreign banking operations;  
x. liquidity management; 
xi. internal audit/control; 
xii. management information system/MIS; 
xiii. planning and budgeting; 
xiv. finance; 
xv. risk management; 
xvi. fixed assets; 
xvii. corporate governance; 
xviii. detection and prevention of criminal activities including 
AML/CFT; 
xix. outsourcing; 
xx. disclosure policy; 
xxi. communication;  
xxii. procurement; and 
xxiii. fraud monitoring. 
 
11.9. Board Succession Planning and Exit of Board Members 
11.9.1. The term of office of the board members shall be organized in a 
manner that ensures a smooth transition. 
11.9.2. The term of office of the members of the board shall end in a 
manner that ensures retention of institutional memory and makes it 
easier to induct new board members. Where possible, no more 
than one third of the board members shall retire at the same time. 
11.10. Exit Report 
11.10.1. At the end of their office term, the outgoing board members shall 
prepare a comprehensive exit report and submit to the National 
Bank and company secretary of the bank, at the latest fifteen (15) 
calendar days before conducting general meeting of shareholders. 
The exit report shall at a minimum cover the board’s performance 
during its office term, challenges, issues requiring the attention of 
the National Bank and/or the incoming new board and the way 
forward. 
11.10.2.  The bank shall not pay board remuneration for final service year to 
outgoing board members if the board fails to comply with the 
requirement set under sub-article 11.10.1 herein above.  
11.11.  Role of Board Chairperson 
11.11.1. The chairperson leads the board and is responsible for its overall 
effectiveness in directing the bank. The chairperson shall 
 
 
 
17 
demonstrate objective judgment and encourage and promote 
critical discussion and a culture of openness and debate, ensuring 
that dissenting view can be freely expressed. In addition, the 
chairperson shall ensure that directors receive accurate, timely and 
clear information, so that decisions can be taken on a sound and 
well-informed basis.  
11.11.2. Board Chairperson’s responsibilities are: 
a) Provide effective leadership to the board by setting the tone and 
agenda, while guiding discussions in meetings. 
b) Ensure the board operates within legal and ethical guidelines 
that all board members are heard and participate in the 
discussion, and policies and procedures are followed. 
c) Facilitate board meetings, ensuring all agenda items are 
covered, discussions are productive, and decisions are made in 
a timely manner. 
d) Serve as a primary liaison between the board, management, and 
shareholders, communicating important information and 
decisions. 
e) Collaborate with other board members and management in 
setting the organization's strategic direction and goals. 
f) Oversee the annual board evaluation, as well as the 
performance evaluations of senior management. 
g) Foster positive relationships with key stakeholders, including 
shareholders, employees, customers, and the community. 
h) Ensure guidelines and procedures are in place to govern the 
board’s operation and conduct.  
12. Company Secretary 
 
12.1. Each bank shall have company secretary, in line with the requirements of 
relevant law. The appointment and dismissal of the secretary shall be 
approved by the board of directors. 
12.2. The secretary shall be accountable to the chief executive officer. 
12.3. The secretary shall have the following powers and duties: 
12.3.1. monitor the corporate governance of the bank, and compliance 
with corporate governance requirements; 
12.3.2. ensure timely and accurate flow of information to board members, 
and to shareholders and third parties, as necessary; 
12.3.3. prepare a calendar of board and committee meetings; 
 
 
 
18 
12.3.4. 
develop and maintain the board charter and policies outlining the 
responsibilities, duties, and expectations of the board and the 
company secretary; 
12.3.5. maintain accurate and up-to-date corporate records, including 
board minutes, resolutions, conflict of interest register and statutory 
registers; 
12.3.6. organize meetings of shareholders and meetings of the board of 
directors; 
12.3.7. prepare, organize and keep minutes;  
12.3.8. ensure effective capacity building and training of board members; 
and  
12.3.9. carry out other tasks assigned to him by chief executive officer and 
the memorandum of association. 
12.4. A bank shall uphold high standards of ethics and integrity, ensuring the 
company secretary acts in the best interests of the organization and its 
stakeholders. 
12.5. If possible, the bank shall support company secretary to obtain company 
secretary training and certification from national or international bodies. 
12.6. Notwithstanding an agreement to the contrary, the secretary shall be liable to 
the bank, shareholders or third parties for any breaches of his duties under 
the Commercial Code or the memorandum of association. 
 
13. Audit Committee 
 
13.1. All banks shall establish an Audit Committee of the board of directors.  
13.2. The objective of the Audit Committee is to provide independent oversight of 
the bank’s financial reporting and internal control system and ensure checks 
and balances within the bank. 
13.3. The Audit Committee shall comprise of at least three (3) directors. All 
members of the Committee shall be non-employees, and at least one (1) of its 
members shall be an independent director. The chairperson of the Committee 
shall be preferably an independent director, and not the chairperson of the 
board or of any other committee.  
13.4. The Audit Committee shall possess a collective balance of skills and expert 
knowledge. At least two (2) members shall have experience in audit practices, 
financial reporting, and accounting. All members shall have the ability to 
understand financial statements and education in accounting or finance.  
13.5. A former partner or director of a bank’s existing auditing firm or auditing 
corporation shall not act as a member of a bank’s audit committee, within a 
 
 
 
19 
period of twelve (12) months after ceasing to be a partner of the audit firm, or 
for as long as he has any financial interest in the audit firm or audit 
corporation.  
13.6. The Audit Committee shall have an explicit authority to investigate any matter 
within its terms of reference, full access to and co-operation by senior 
management and shall have full discretion to invite any director or executive 
officer to attend its meetings. The Audit committee shall have reasonable 
resources to enable it discharge its functions properly. The Audit Committee 
shall have full and unrestricted access to information, and unfettered access 
to senior management, to the internal audit and risk management functions. 
The Audit Committee shall be able to obtain independent professional advice.  
13.7. The Audit Committee shall develop a committee charter, for approval by the 
full board, laying out its composition, roles and responsibilities, and meeting 
requirements. 
13.8. The Audit Committee shall hold regular meetings, at least once every quarter 
and shall report regularly to the full board. 
 
The Audit Committee shall be responsible for: 
 
13.9. Oversight of the Financial Reporting Process: 
13.9.1. ensuring fair and transparent financial reporting, and prompt 
publication of the financial accounts;  
13.9.2. recommending approval by the board of the bank’s policies on 
accounting policy and financial reporting; 
13.9.3. overseeing the financial reporting process; and 
13.9.4. 
approving financial statements prior to their submission to the full 
board. 
13.10. Oversight of the External Audit Process 
13.10.1. recommending to the board for their approval, the appointment, 
remuneration and dismissal of external auditors;  
13.10.2. 
review and approve the audit scope and frequency;  
13.10.3. 
receive key audit reports and ensure that senior management is 
taking necessary corrective actions in a timely manner to address 
control weaknesses, non-compliance with policies, laws and 
regulations, and other problems identified by auditors and other 
control functions;  
13.10.4. 
ensuring adequate functioning, independence and effective 
cooperation of internal and external audits; and 
 
 
 
20 
13.10.5. 
review any non-audit services provided by the external auditor, 
seeking to maintain the objectivity of the external auditor and 
avoid conflicts of interest. 
13.11. Oversight of Non-financial Reporting and Assurance 
13.11.1. ensuring fair and transparent reporting of material sustainability 
information; 
13.11.2. 
ensuring fair and transparent reporting of performance audit 
information; and 
13.11.3. 
overseeing the process of seeking independent, external assurance 
of non-financial information.  
13.12. Oversight of the Internal Audit Function 
13.12.1. overseeing the functions of the Internal Audit Unit; 
13.12.2. approving the annual internal audit plan;  
13.12.3. ensuring full coverage of the bank's activities by internal controls 
and internal or external audits;  
13.12.4. ensuring that all the bank's activities are audited by the internal 
audit in a cycle whose duration shall not exceed three (3) years 
and must be adjusted depending on the risk profile;  
13.12.5. assessing the adequacy of human, information technology and 
other resources allocated to the internal control function; 
13.12.6. ensuring that the internal controllers and auditors have the 
necessary skills, and proposing measures to strengthen their 
expertise and qualifications as necessary;  
13.12.7. verifying the reliability and accuracy of financial information 
intended for the board, the National Bank and third parties, and 
assess the relevance of the accounting methods adopted for the 
preparation of the individual and consolidated accounts; 
13.12.8. assessing the relevance of the corrective measures taken or 
proposed to remedy the shortcomings or insufficiencies detected 
in the processing of transactions, following control or audit 
reports, or even, if applicable, in the internal control system;  
13.12.9. ensuring the effective and rapid implementation of the corrective 
measures recommended by the control and audit functions and, 
if necessary, alert the board, or the National Bank directly in the 
event of non-implementation; and 
13.12.10. assessing whether existing policies, processes and internal 
controls (including risk management, compliance, Shari’ah 
compliance and corporate governance processes) are effective, 
 
 
 
21 
appropriate and remain sufficient for interest free banking 
business. 
 
14. Internal Audit Function 
 
14.1. The internal audit function is responsible for reviewing the scope of the 
internal audit program, internal audit findings and recommend actions to be 
taken by management. 
14.2. The head of internal audit function is appointed or removed based on the 
recommendation of the audit committee, and by the approval of the board of 
directors. The remuneration shall be determined independently of any 
business line overseen, and performance measures shall be based principally 
on the achievement of its own objectives to ensure independence. 
14.3. Any measure of dismissal or transfer of the head of internal audit can only 
take place after informing, accompanied by a supporting file, the National 
Bank showing the reasons for the decision. The revocation can only take 
place by the board, after obtaining assent of the audit committee. The head 
of internal audit cannot be dismissed if he has exercised his functions in good 
faith. An abusive revocation measure taken without respecting the provisions 
of this Article will be subject to the sanctions. 
14.4. The internal audit function shall review material related party transactions 
such as  those exceeding Birr fifteen (15) million or otherwise posing special 
risk) and express its reasoned (non-binding) opinion on related party 
transactions, including the bank’s interest in entering into the transaction, and 
the convenience and substantial correctness of its underlying terms.  
 
15. Risk Management and Compliance  
 
15.1. Governance of Risk Management  
15.1.1. A bank shall follow the three (3) lines of defense model and assign 
responsibilities for risk management at key levels of the 
organization, including in the business units, as part of a dedicated 
risk management function and an independent internal audit 
function. 
15.1.2. A bank shall have a dedicated risk management unit overseen by a 
chief risk officer, whose functions are further defined in separate 
National Bank Directives. The chief risk officer shall be independent 
from the individual business lines and have direct and unimpeded 
 
 
 
22 
access to the bank’s board of directors and in particular to the Risk 
Management and Compliance Committee.  
a) The chief risk officer is responsible for supporting the 
committee (and the full board) in its engagement with and 
oversight of the development of the bank’s risk appetite and risk 
appetite statement and for translating the risk appetite into a 
risk limits structure.  
b) The chief risk officer shall report and have direct access to the 
board or risk management and compliance committee without 
impediment. The chief risk officer shall have the ability to meet 
with the board or risk management and compliance committee 
in the absence of other executive directors and senior 
management members. 
c) The appointment, dismissal, and other changes to the chief risk 
officer or its equivalent position shall be approved by the board 
of directors. The bank shall discuss the reasons for such 
removal with the National Bank. 
d) The chief risk officer’s performance, compensation and budget 
shall be reviewed and approved by the risk management and 
compliance committee. The compensation shall be determined 
independently of any business line overseen, and performance 
measures shall be based principally on the achievement of its 
own objectives so as not to compromise the independence. 
e) The appointment of chief risk officer is subject to the prior 
approval of the National Bank. 
15.1.3. A bank shall integrate sustainability in the overall risk management and 
control framework, including risk appetite and tolerance, and the three-
line-of-defense model, and evaluate the impact of sustainability on their 
risk profile and capital adequacy and liquidity positions. This includes 
assessing the impact of sustainability on traditional risks facing financial 
institutions, including credit risk, liquidity risk, market risk, and 
operational risks. 
15.1.4. A bank shall analyze the risk to the loan portfolio presented by climate 
change, natural resource constraints, human rights concerns, or other 
broad sustainability trends, and assess the concentration of 
sustainability-related risks in specific industry and geography, including 
sectors vulnerable to climate transition risk and physical risk or priority 
sectors for climate adaptation. 
 
 
 
 
23 
15.2. Risk Management and Compliance Committee 
The Board Risk Management and Compliance Committee of a bank shall: 
15.2.1. be responsible for oversight of the strategies for capital and liquidity 
management, as well as for all relevant risks of the bank, such as credit, 
market, operational and reputational risks and others to be specified in 
the relevant National Bank Directives to ensure they are consistent with 
the stated risk appetite; 
15.2.2. develop a committee charter, for approval by the full board of directors, 
laying out its composition, roles and responsibilities, and meeting 
requirements; 
15.2.3. hold regular meetings, at least once every month and shall report 
regularly to the full board; 
15.2.4. 
comprise at least three (3) directors. The chairperson of the committee 
shall be preferably independent, and not the chairperson of the board 
or any other committee. The Committee shall include members who 
have experience in risk management issues and practices; 
15.2.5. receive regular reporting and communication from the chief risk officer 
and other relevant functions about the bank’s current risk profile, 
current state of the risk culture, utilization against the established risk 
appetite, and limits, limit breaches and mitigation plans; 
15.2.6. have effective communication and coordination with the audit 
committee to facilitate the exchange of information and effective 
coverage of all risks, including emerging risks, and any needed 
adjustments to the risk governance framework of the bank; and 
15.2.7. be responsible at least for: 
a) reviewing and recommending risk management strategies, 
policies, risk appetite statements, and risk tolerance limits for 
board’s approval; 
b) reviewing and assessing adequacy of risk management policies 
and framework in identifying, measuring, monitoring and 
controlling risk, as well as, the extent to which these are operating 
effectively; 
c) ensuring infrastructure, resources and systems are in place for 
risk management; 
d) ensuring the staff responsible for implementing risk management 
systems perform those duties independently of the bank’s risk-
taking activities;  
e) reviewing management’s periodic reports on risk exposure, risk 
portfolio composition and risk management activities; 
 
 
 
24 
f) periodically reviewing the effectiveness of internal controls and 
risk management processes;  
g) assessing the quality of the internal control system, in particular 
the consistency of the risk measurement, monitoring and control 
systems and propose, where appropriate, reinforcement actions 
in this regard; and 
h) checking compliance with the policies and rules of the bank and 
with 
relevant 
proclamations, 
regulations, 
Directives 
and 
guidelines of the National Bank and other relevant laws. 
 
16. Nomination and Remuneration Committee 
 
16.1. The primary objectives of Nomination and Remuneration Committee are to: 
16.1.1.  identify and nominate candidates for independent members of the 
board of directors, for election by the general shareholders 
meeting;  
16.1.2. nominate candidates for senior executive officer positions, for 
approval by the full board of directors;  
16.1.3. provide a formal and transparent proposal on the employment and 
removal of the chief executive officer and senior executive officers 
if they are ineffective, errant or negligent in discharging their 
responsibilities;  
16.1.4. make recommendations on the compensation/benefit systems of 
the bank;  
16.1.5. oversee human resource policy; human resource strategy and 
employee performance management processes ; 
16.1.6.  oversee training programs for members of the board; and 
16.1.7. review and endorse succession plans prepared by the 
management of the bank. 
16.2. The Committee shall strive to ensure the board is not dominated by any one 
individual or small group of individuals in a manner that is detrimental to the 
interests of the bank. 
16.3. The Committee shall strive to ensure remuneration is appropriate and 
consistent with the bank’s culture and value, including the risk culture, ethical 
conduct, long-term business success and sustainability. 
16.4. The Committee shall comprise at least four (4) directors.  
16.5. The Committee is responsible at least for the following: 
 
 
 
25 
16.5.1. prepare a profile of the ideal independent board of directors, based 
on discussions with the full board, and  use the profile as a basis 
for the recruitment of good candidates; 
16.5.2. recruit independent directors to serve on the board, with the 
assistance of recruitment consultants as necessary. Following 
deliberations, the Committee will forward its proposed candidates 
to the board of directors for further review and presentation to the 
general meeting. All independent directors nominated shall meet 
or exceed the National Bank’s requirements; 
16.5.3. 
lead the process of nominating candidates to serve as senior 
managers, for appointment by the board of directors. The 
Committee will recruit candidates for open positions, with the 
assistance of recruitment consultants as necessary. Following 
deliberations, the Committee will forward a “short list” of proposed 
candidates to the board of directors; 
16.5.4. 
at the request of the board chairperson,  and after detailed review, 
provide a formal and transparent proposal on the employment and 
removal of senior management members if they are ineffective, 
errant and/or negligent in discharging their responsibilities, for 
decision by the full board;  
16.5.5. 
monitor the bank’s compensation and benefits practices, and 
periodically benchmark these practices against a set of peer 
institutions, in cooperation with the bank’s human resources 
department. 
The 
Committee 
will 
periodically 
make 
recommendations on the compensation/benefit systems of the 
bank, for decision by the full board. The Committee will also 
periodically review other human resource policies of the bank, as 
requested by the board of directors; and 
16.5.6. 
develop training programs for board members by working with the 
company secretary and outside consultants as necessary. The 
Committee shall review the effectiveness of these programs and 
make changes as necessary. 
16.6. The Committee shall hold regular meetings, at least once every three months 
or as necessary, and shall report regularly to the full board. 
 
17. Credit Committee  
 
17.1. The primary objective of the Credit Committee is to assist the board of 
directors in reviewing and overseeing the overall lending of the bank. 
 
 
 
26 
17.2. The Committee shall comprise of at least four (4) directors. At least one (1) of 
the directors shall be an independent director of the bank. 
17.3. To enhance independence and objectivity of the Committee, banks are 
required to appoint an independent non-executive director as the 
chairperson of the Committee. The chairperson of the bank’s board shall not 
chair the Credit Committee but can be included as a member. 
17.4. The Committee shall be responsible at least for the following: 
17.4.1. review and oversee the overall lending policy of the bank; 
17.4.2. deliberate and consider loan applications beyond the discretionary 
limits of the Credit Risk Management Committee;  
17.4.3. review lending by the Credit Risk Management Committee; 
17.4.4. 
ensure there are effective procedures and resources to identify and 
manage irregular problem credits, minimize credit loss and 
maximize recoveries; 
17.4.5. direct, monitor, review and consider all issues that may materially 
impact on the present and future quality of the bank’s credit risk 
management;   
17.4.6. delegate and review lending limits to the sanctioning arms of the 
bank; 
17.4.7. assist the board with discharging its responsibility to review the 
quality of the bank’s loan portfolio and ensuring adequate 
provisions for bad and doubtful debts in compliance with  
prudential requirements; 
17.4.8. conduct loan reviews independent of any person or committee 
responsible for sanctioning credit; and 
17.4.9. ensure the credit policy and risk lending limits are reviewed at least 
on an annual basis and as and when the environment so dictates.  
 
18. Senior Management 
 
18.1. Under the direction and oversight of the board, senior management shall 
carry out and manage the bank’s activities in a manner consistent with the 
business strategy, risk appetite, remuneration and other policies approved by 
the board.  
18.2. Senior management consists of a core group of individuals responsible and 
accountable to the board for the sound and prudent day-to-day management 
of the bank.  
 
 
 
27 
18.3. Senior management shall provide the board of directors with any information 
the board of directors or its committees deem necessary to properly carry out 
their tasks and responsibilities. 
18.4. The organization, procedures and decision-making of senior management 
shall be clear and transparent and designed to promote effective 
management of the bank. This includes clarity on the role, power, and 
responsibility of the various positions within senior management, including 
that of the chief executive officer.  
18.5. The bank may form an executive committee, consisting of the chief executive 
officer and senior executive officers. The composition, role, responsibilities, 
and meeting procedures shall be established by a separate charter. 
18.6. Members of senior management shall have the necessary experience, 
competencies and integrity to manage the businesses and the people under 
their supervision. They shall receive access to regular training to maintain and 
enhance their competencies and stay up to date on developments relevant 
to their areas of responsibility.  
18.7. The Board Charter shall clearly establish which senior management positions 
require board approval. 
18.8. Members of senior management shall be selected through an appropriate 
promotion or recruitment process, which considers the qualifications required 
for the position in question. For those senior management positions for which 
the board of directors is required to review or select candidates through an 
interview process, senior management shall provide sufficient information to 
the board.  
18.9. Senior management contributes substantially to a bank’s sound corporate 
governance by setting appropriate ethical and professional standards, the 
“tone at the top”. Members of senior management shall provide adequate 
oversight of those they manage and ensure the bank’s activities are consistent 
with the business strategy, risk appetite and the policies approved by the 
board.  
18.10. Senior management shall include consideration of sustainability risks and 
opportunities in strategic objectives, focusing on sustainability impacts, risks 
and opportunities in lending and investments activities, as well as in 
operations and the supply chain.  
18.11. Senior management shall establish policies, procedures, and targets to 
identify and manage climate, nature, labor, community, and other 
sustainability-related risks at client operations and that these are integrated in 
the existing credit and risk management framework. 
 
 
 
28 
18.12. Senior management is responsible for delegating duties to staff and shall 
establish a management structure that promotes accountability and 
transparency throughout the bank. 
18.13. Senior management shall be responsible to establish and implement 
management level committees including Executive Committee and Asset and 
Liabilities Management Committee.  
18.14. Senior management shall recognize and respect the independent duties of 
the risk management, compliance and internal audit functions and shall not 
interfere in their exercise of such duties.  
18.15. Senior management shall provide the board with the information it needs to 
carry out its responsibilities, supervise senior management and assess the 
quality of senior management’s performance. In this regard, senior 
management shall keep the board regularly and adequately informed of 
material matters, including: 
18.15.1. changes in business strategy, risk strategy/risk appetite; 
18.15.2. the bank’s performance and financial condition;  
18.15.3. breaches of risk limits or compliance rules; 
18.15.4. 
internal control failures;  
18.15.5. legal or regulatory concerns; and  
18.15.6. 
issues raised because of the bank’s whistleblowing procedures. 
18.16. Without prejudice to the duties and responsibilities stated in any applicable 
laws, regulations, the National Bank Directives, and memorandum of 
association of the bank, a chief executive officer shall at least be responsible 
for: 
18.16.1. developing corporate strategies, policies, business plans and 
budgets which are subject to approval by the board before 
implementation;  
18.16.2. developing, approving and implementing procedure manuals, 
guidelines and controls to address compliance with laws and 
regulations applicable to the bank’s business environment and risk 
profile; 
18.16.3. ensuring documents indicated under sub-article 18.16.1 and 
18.16.2 of this Article are communicated to all concerned staff;  
18.16.4. 
preparing 
an 
organizational 
structure 
that 
clearly 
and 
appropriately assigns duties, responsibilities and authorities, and 
ensures segregation of duties, which shall be subject to board 
approval;  
18.16.5. 
selecting and presenting all senior executive officers except chief 
internal audit and chief risk management &/or compliance for 
 
 
 
29 
nomination and remuneration committee which shall be subject to 
board approval;  
18.16.6. 
allocating authorities, duties and responsibilities in well-defined 
job specification and description; 
18.16.7.  developing management information system that adequately 
addresses the bank’s business environment and risk profile, 
getting approval from the board and implementing it; 
18.16.8. 
providing the board with timely, relevant, accurate and complete 
reports on the plan performance;  
18.16.9. 
implementing an effective internal control system and risk 
management program of the bank;  
18.16.10. 
implementing timely corrective action on deficiencies and issues 
that have been raised or reported by the National Bank, external 
and internal auditors and risk and/or compliance managers; and 
18.16.11. 
implementing the resolutions of the board. 
 
18.17. Key performance indicators to monitor the performance of senior 
management shall at least include: 
18.17.1. the bank’s record of compliance with laws, regulations and board 
approved policies; 
18.17.2.  internal audit, external audit, risk management findings, 
recommendations and rectifications. 
18.17.3.  risk profile of the bank against risk tolerance limits; 
18.17.4. timely execution of regulatory and supervisory concerns raised by 
the National Bank; 
18.17.5.  the timeliness, quality, and accuracy of management’s 
recommendations and reports; and 
18.17.6.  key business and financial performance indicators, such as actual 
versus projected performance, performance trend, peer group 
comparisons and ratios. 
 
19. Shareholder Rights 
 
19.1. A bank shall facilitate the exercise of shareholders’ rights and ensure the 
equitable treatment of all shareholders, including minority shareholders. 
19.2. Shareholders’ rights shall include information, voting and financial rights, 
including to: 
19.2.1. secure methods of ownership registration;  
19.2.2. convey or transfer shares;  
 
 
 
30 
19.2.3. share in the profits of the bank;  
19.2.4. 
obtain material information on a timely and regular basis;  
19.2.5. vote in general shareholder meetings; 
19.2.6. 
elect members of the board of directors; and 
19.2.7. appoint the external auditor. 
19.3. Related party transactions shall be approved and conducted in a manner that 
ensures proper management of conflicts of interest and protects the interests 
of the bank and its shareholders. 
19.4. Members of the board of directors and management shall disclose to the 
board whether they, directly, indirectly or on behalf of third parties, have a 
material interest in any transaction or matter directly affecting the bank. 
19.5. Anti-takeover devices shall not be used to shield management and the board 
from accountability. 
19.6. Shareholders shall be protected from adverse actions by controlling 
shareholders, acting either directly or indirectly, and shall have effective 
means of redress. 
 
20. 
General Meeting of Shareholders  
 
20.1. Without prejudice to provisions provided in the Commercial Code of Ethiopia, 
the ordinary general meeting of shareholders of a bank shall: 
20.1.1. strive in a good faith that only competent and reliable persons who 
meet the requirements of the National Bank, and can enrich good 
corporate governance and add value to the bank, are elected or 
appointed as a director;  
20.1.2. 
decide upon the appointment and service fee of an external auditor 
as proposed by the Audit Committee and the board and this power 
shall not be delegated to any other organ or body in the bank’s 
structure;  
20.1.3. 
ensure the board is held accountable and responsible for the 
inefficient and ineffective governance; 
20.2. Representation by a voter in person and by proxy in any shareholders meeting 
shall be limited to the aggregate, including the voter’s own shares, of a 
maximum of ten percent (10%) of the total subscribed capital of a bank. 
20.3. A sitting board member or any employee of a bank including chief executive 
officer or a senior executive officer shall not represent and be proxy of any 
other shareholder in any shareholders meeting of the bank. 
 
 
 
31 
20.4. A shareholder to be considered for being board nominee in a bank shall be 
registered shareholder of the bank for a minimum of two consecutive years 
preceding the date of shareholders meeting of the bank.  
 
21. Disclosure 
 
21.1. A bank shall be transparent to any shareholders, depositors and other 
relevant stakeholders without breaching the law of the country and the 
National Bank Directives.  
21.2. Without prejudice to provisions in other laws and National Bank Directives, a 
bank shall at a minimum disclose the following to the National Bank: 
21.2.1. submit any related party loan/foreign currency transactions, banks 
fixed assets, and technology transactions of material nature, as defined 
by the board, within fifteen (15) working days from the date of the 
transaction specifying the name, type of transaction and amount 
involved;  
21.2.2. report the status of the transactions stated under sub-article 21.2.1, at 
least once in a month; through attestation by the board that such 
transactions have been carried out at an arm’s-length in compliance 
with the regulatory requirements, the bank’s own policies and 
procedures; and 
21.2.3. key points concerning risk exposures and risk management strategy. 
21.3. Without prejudice to provisions in other laws and the National Bank 
Directives, a bank shall make public, timely and accurate disclosure on all 
material matters regarding the organization, including the financial situation, 
performance, sustainability, ownership, and governance of the company.  
21.4. Disclosure shall be done in a timely fashion through a public website, annual 
and 
periodic 
financial 
reports, 
and 
through 
other 
appropriate 
mechanisms.  Public disclosure shall include an annual report to shareholders 
with the following information: 
21.4.1. strategic objectives of the organization; 
21.4.2. risks factors; 
21.4.3. 
narrative report summarizing the bank’s results for the past year;  
21.4.4. 
the three (3) most recent available set of audited financial statements, 
including statements of financial position, statement of comprehensive 
income and expense accounts together with auditors’ report; 
21.4.5. 
external audit by independent, competent and qualified auditor; 
21.4.6. 
debt contracts, including the risk of non-compliance with covenants;  
21.4.7. a corporate governance report, indicating: 
 
 
 
32 
a) board members, including their qualification, experience and 
membership on board committees, and whether or not the bank 
considers each director to be independent;  
b) the approach used for the selection of board member for ensuring an 
appropriate diversity of skill, background, and viewpoints.  
c) role and activity/performance of the board of directors; 
d) evaluation of the board of directors; 
e) the bank’s basic organizational structure, including line business 
structure; 
f) the bank’s memorandum of association; 
g) capital structure and ownership including major share ownership and 
voting rights, group structures and their control arrangements;  
h) risk management process, including risk appetite, control and audit; 
i) compensation of members of the board and key executives, including 
policy and criteria, performance-based compensation and risk 
adjustment; and aggregate total compensation; 
j) related party transactions; and 
k) sustainability-related information including the governance process, 
strategy, risk management and metrics to address sustainability 
matters that are material for the organization, including sustainability-
related risks and opportunities in a bank’s loan portfolio. 
21.5. Exhibit at every one of its places of business, including its branches and sub-
branches, in a conspicuous place throughout the year, covering at a minimum 
a copy of its latest audited statement of financial position, a comprehensive 
income and expense report and cash flow analysis in respect of all its 
operations during the period. 
21.6. The exhibition and publishing of the annual report pursuant to sub-articles 
20.3 and 20.4 of this article shall occur within one month after the annual 
shareholders meeting. 
 
22. 
Supervision 
 
22.1. The National Bank shall supervise corporate governance at banks, including 
through comprehensive evaluations and regular interaction with boards and 
senior management, and will suggest remedial action as necessary. 
22.2. The National Bank shall assess each bank’s corporate governance 
performance, especially with respect to the risk culture of the bank. This 
includes a consideration of the behavioral dynamic of the board and senior 
management, including the “tone at the top” and the cultural values of the 
 
 
 
33 
bank are communicated and put into practice, how information flows to and 
from the board and senior management, and how potential serious problems 
are identified and addressed throughout the organization.  
22.3. The National Bank will interact regularly with boards of directors, individual 
board members, senior managers and those responsible for the risk 
management, compliance, and internal audit functions. The purpose of the 
interactions is to support timely and open dialogue between the bank and 
supervisors. 
22.4. The National Bank may produce additional guidelines to assist banks in the 
implementation of good corporate governance practices. 
22.5. The board of directors is responsible for: 
22.5.1. ensuring the National Bank’s examination report is considered as 
confidential by the directors and/or employees of the bank; 
22.5.2. ensuring appropriate and timely actions are taken to address the 
regulatory and supervisory concerns and instructions of the 
National Bank; and 
22.5.3. following 
up 
the 
implementation 
of 
findings 
and 
recommendations of on-site examination and off-site surveillance 
reports of the National Bank, the external auditor, and the internal 
control functions. 
22.6. The company secretary is responsible for ensuring minutes of general 
meetings of shareholders are delivered to the National Bank within twenty 
(20) working days from the date of such meetings of shareholders for 
approval and for following up timely registration of the same with the 
appropriate government organ.  
 
23. 
Penalties  
 
23.1. Without prejudice to Article 65 of Proclamation Number 592/2008 (as 
Amended by Proclamation 1159/2019), a director who in any matter transacts 
or causes to be transacted or an influential shareholder for whom a 
transaction is concluded in contravention of sub-article 8.5 of this Directive, 
depending on the gravity of the violation, shall be: 
23.1.1. prohibited from taking any new loans or renewing existing loans 
and concluding foreign currency related transactions with the bank 
in which he is an influential shareholder or director for three (3) 
consecutive years effective from the date of identification of the 
violation; 
 
 
 
34 
23.1.2. suspended or removed from his seat on the board for at least three 
(3) consecutive years effective from the date of identification of the 
violation; 
23.1.3. prohibited from investing in new shares or from buying existing 
shares in any financial institution for three consecutive years 
effective from the date of identification of the violation; and 
23.1.4. 
subjected to any other appropriate administrative action the 
National Bank deems necessary. 
 
23.2. Without prejudice to article 17(1) of Proclamation Number 592/2008(as 
Amended by Proclamation No. 1159/2019), the National Bank, depending on 
the degree or frequency of incompliance, may suspend or remove chief 
executive officer or senior executive officer who in any matter transacts or 
causes to be transacted in contravention of sub-article 8.5 of this Directive. 
 
24. 
Applicability of Other Laws 
 
24.1. Nothing in this Directive shall be construed to relieve a bank or any other 
pertinent person from complying with the provisions of the Commercial Code 
of Ethiopia, Public Enterprises Proclamation or any other relevant laws. 
24.2. No Directive or established practice may, in so far as it is inconsistent with the 
provisions of this Directive, have effect with respect to matters provided by 
this Directive.  
 
25. 
Transitional Provision  
 
A bank shall apply provisions related to nomination and election of board of director 
after expiry of the terms of the existing boards of directors. 
 
26. 
Repealed Directive 
 
Bank Corporate Governance Directive No. SBB/71/2019 (1st Replacement) is hereby 
repealed and replaced by this Directive. 
 
27. 
Effective Date 
 
This Directive shall enter into force as of the 12th day of June, 2024. 
