PATEK !E Ide PR Ih

NATIONAL BANK OF ETHIOPIA
ADDIS ABABA
FINANCIAL CONSUMER PROTECTION

DIRECTIVE NO. FCP/01/2020

Whereas, trust and confidence of financial consumers promote financial inclusion, healthy financial

transactions, and stimulate growth, stability, ethical innovation and efficiency in the financial system;

Whereas, innovation and development in the financial infrastructure and products and services, would

possibly increase the risks and challenges. particularly that low-income and less experienced financial

consumers face; i

Whereas establishing clear and- objective financial consumer protection regulation, supervision,
complaint handling and dispute resolution mechanisms are necessary to promote fair, responsible and
transparent financial transactions and shape professional conduct of financial services providers towards

_ financial consumers;

Now, therefore, in accordance with article 57 of the Banking Business Proclamation No. 592/2008 as
amended by Banking (Amendment) Proclamation No. 1159/2019, article 59 of the Insurance Business
Proclamation No. 746/2012 as amended by Insurance (Amendment) Proclamation No. 1163/2019, article
26 of the Micro-financing Business Proclamation No. 626/2009 as amended by Microfinance Business
(Amendment) Proclamation No. 1164/2019 and article 20(2) of the National Payment Proclamation No.
718/2011, the National Bank of Ethiopia has issued this directive as follows.

LL Short title

This - directive may be cited as “FINANCIAL CONSUMER PROTECTION DIRECTIVE NO.
FCP/01/2020”

2. ~ Definitions
Unless the context otherwise provides, for the purpose of this directive:
2.1. “account” means an account relating to a financial products or services:
2.2, “agent” means a person appointed and contracted by the financial service provider to act

on behalf of a financial service provider and for a commission in a manner specified by

the relevant directives of the National Bank;

AREA AF 149 741.4, 5550/2048 4hN HPC 0115 51 45 8B AA #PC 0115 51.7430 AA

ADDRESS: SUDAN STRCET .. P.O.BOX 5550/2048 FAX No, 0115 51 4588 TEL. No. 0115517430 ADDIS ABABA
__. TELEGRAPHIC ADDRESS: NATIONBANK -
CODES-USED PETERSON 3" & 4" ED BENTLEY'S 2™ PHRASE A.B.C. 6" EDITIO
E-mail: nbe.excd@ ethionet.et. Website. www.http:// www nbe.gov.et
/

/
{
U

23s

2.4.

2.5.

2.6.

2.7.

2.8.

29.

2.10.

211.

2.12.

2.13.

“annual interest rate” means the per annum rate of interest that applies under a financial

consumer contract;

“board” means the Board of Directors of a financial service provider;

“complaint” means an expression of dissatisfaction relating to a financial product or
service or security by a financial consumer or security provider that is not immediately

resolved by the financial service provider;

“complainant” means a person who lodges complaint against a financial service

provider to the National Bank;

“credit account” means an account held in relation to a financial consumer credit

contract;

“credit insurance” means insurance that guarantees the capacity of a financial consumer
to make payments under a consumer credit contract, including in the event of one or more

of sickness, injury, disability, death or unemployment;

“current account” means a deposit account used to receive and send money and pay for
goods and services which may have attached to it a cheque facility and / or an overdraft

facility and on which no interest, or only nominal interest, is paid;

“dispute resolution” means a processes used to resolve disputes between parties to the

financial transaction, including negotiation, mediation, arbitration, and litigation etc;

“digital financial services” means financial services including payments, remittances

and insurance accessed and delivered through digital channels;

“external dispute resolution” means a dedicated scheme, to be established by the
National Bank, for resolving disputes between the financial consumer and/or the security

provider and the financial service provider;

“financial consumer” means a current or a prospective customer of a financial service

provider;

aA
2.14.

2.15.

2.16.

2.17.

2.18.

2.19.

2.20.

2.21.

2.22.
2.23.

2.24,

LA

“financial consumer contract” means a contract between the financial consumer and

the financial service provider on financial products or services;

“financial product or service” means any product or service of a financial nature
ry

marketed, offered or provided to financial consumers by a financial service provider ;

“financial service provider” means banks, insurers, microfinance institutions, Capital
Goods Finance Companies, postal savings, money transfer institution or such other

similar institution as specified by the National Bank;

“ fixed term loan’’ means a type of loan that is repaid in regular payments over a set

period of time;

“fixed term loan contract” means a contract for a fixed term loan;

“Key Facts Statement” or “KFS” means pre-contractual information provided by a
financial service provider to its financial consumers in printed or electronic format that

summarize the main characteristics of the financial products or services;

“internal complaint handling process” means a complaint or dispute resolution
process to resolve disputes between the financial consumer or security provider and the
financial services provider in accordance with the written policies and procedures of the

latter and applicable directives of the National Bank;

“mobile wallet account” means an on—demand account used to receive and send money
and pay for goods and services via a mobile device such as a mobile phone, but which
does not have attached to it a check or overdraft facility;

“National Bank” means the National Bank of Ethiopia;

“person” means natural or legal person;
p

“personal characteristic or affiliation” means gender, race, ethnicity, political

affiliation or beliefs, marital status, disability or sexual orientation;
2.25.

2.26.

2.27.

2.28.

2.29;

2.30.

2.31.

Zed2e

2.33.

“advice” means advice given to a financial consumer or to security provider in relation
to the suitability of a specific financial product or service for that financial consumer’s

financial objectives, needs or capacity;

“data” means any information about an identified or reasonably identifiable financial

consumer or security provider;

“receipt” means paper or electronic evidence provided by the financial services provider

for any payment in respect of financial products and services;

“savings account” means an on-demand deposit account on which interest may be
earned on any part of the account balance, but which is not a time deposit or a mobile

wallet account;

“security” means any:

a) security rights over movable property as defined in a Proclamation
No.1147/2019, to provide for Movable Property Security Right ;

b) security rights over immovable property;

c) personal guarantee; or

d) other undertaking,

granted for the purposes of providing security for the obligations of a financial consumer

in relation to any financial product or service;

“security contract” means a contract for a security;

“standard form contract” means a financial product and service contract or a security
contract that has been prepared by a financial service provider without negotiation and

consent with the financial consumer or security provider;

“security provider” means a financial consumer that provides or proposes to provide a

security;

“third party” means a person who is outside of or not a direct party to the contractual

) relationship between the financial service provider and the financial consumer;

1 4A
2.34, “time deposit” means a deposit account in which all or part of the balance is deposited

for a fixed period at an agreed interest rate;

2.35. “unfair terms” has the meaning specified in Article 5.1.1.2 of this directive; and

2.36. Expressions in the masculine gender include the feminine.

3s Scope of applications
This directive shall apply to any financial service provider, financial product and service, and financial

consumer and security provider.

4. General provisions
4.1. Fair treatment
Financial services providers:
4.1.1. shall treat all financial consumers equitably, respectfully, honestly and fairly at

all stages of their relationship with the financial consumers;

4.1.2. shall not discriminate, unless required or permitted by law, against any financial
consumer or security provider on the basis of a personal characteristic or

affiliation with the financial consumer; and

4.1.3. give special attention and priority to the particular needs of, and difficulties
faced by, vulnerable, socially and economically marginalized consumer groups

such as inexperienced consumers, physically disabled, etc....

4.2. Transparency and disclosure

A financial service provider shall ensure that financial consumers and security providers are
provided with accurate, simple, clearly expressed and timely information about the features,
likely risks, obligations and other terms and cost of any financial product or service or security

they are considering.

4.3. Product design and suitability
Financial service providers have general obligations to take reasonable steps to:
4.3.1. ensure that any financial product or service shall be designed, marketed and

distributed having appropriate regard to the likely financial objectives, needs,

5
capacity and behaviors of financial consumers in the target market with a view to

minimizing the risk of harm to those financial consumers; and

4.3.2. consider the financial objectives, needs and capacity of a financial consumer

before providing them with a financial product.

4.4. Data protection

A financial service provider shall:

4.4.1. keep data confidential and secure; and

4.4.2. only use and disclose a financial consumer’s or security provider’s data for
legitimate purposes agreed to it by the financial consumer or security provider or

otherwise permitted by law.

4.5. | Complaint handling mechanism
Financial services providers shall:
4.5.1. provide the financial consumers or security providers with easy access to a

transparent, effective, prompt and free internal complaints process; and

4.5.2. make the financial consumers and security providers aware of any available

External Dispute Resolution mechanisms including that provided by the National

Bank and court of law.

Specific provisions
5.1. Fair treatment or business conduct requirements
5.1.1. Unfair contractual terms
S111, A financial service provider shall be prohibited from including, or
seeking to enforce against a financial consumer or security provider,

any unfair term in a standard form contract.

5.1.1.2. A term of a standard form contract shall be unfair if it:
a) imposes terms inconsistent with Article 1710(2) of the Civil
Code, that is, having the consent of the injured party by taking
advantage of his want, simplicity of mind, senility or manifest

business inexperience;
§.1.1.3.

5.1.1.4.

b) causes a significant imbalance in the rights and obligations
between a financial consumer or security provider and a
financial service provider;

c) causes detriment to the financial consumer or security provider;
and

d) is different from the one that is stipulated to protect the financial

service provider’s legitimate interests.

For the purpose of testing unfair terms as per Article 5.1.1.2, unfair
terms in a standard form contract or security contract, but not limited
to, include:

a) allowing the financial service provider to make changes to
financial consumers’ contracts or security providers’ contract
without describing the circumstances to the financial consumer
in which such change may be made;

b) allowing charging of fees or charges not previously disclosed or
which are prohibited;

c) restricting early repayment of a credit contract; and

A financial consumer contract or a security contract will be
presumed to be a standard form contract unless the financial service

provider proves otherwise.

5.1.2. Unfair fees and charges

Financial services providers shall not charge a financial consumer any fee:

(A

5:12.15

5.1.2.2.

5.1.2.3.

5.1.2.4.

hat was not previously disclosed;

for any early repayment of a credit contract that exceed a reasonable

administrative costs associated with the contract;

hat exceeds their reasonable administrative costs to close an

account;

hat exceeds their reasonable enforcement expenses for the action

aken;
5.1.2.5.

5.1.2.6.

for recovering an amount payable by the former to a third party that

exceed the amount actually owed to third party; and

that is prohibited under this directive or any other law.

5.1.3. Barriers to account mobility and account closure

Financial services providers shall have a duty:

5.1.3.1.

5.1.3.2.

to promptly process a financial consumers request to close their
deposit account and provide them with appropriate assistance and
information for doing so, including with canceling any recurring

payments; and

not to debit the deposit account with new charges, following the
account closure, and promptly pay the financial consumer any

money due to them under the account.

5.1.4. Obligation to acquire insurance

5.1.4.1.

5.1.4.2.

A financial service provider shall not require a financial consumer or
security provider to acquire, or pay for, insurance unless it is:

a) an insurance that covers a property that is subject to a security;

b) credit insurance; or

c) an insurance that is required by law.

A financial service provider:

a) shall be prohibited from requiring a financial consumer or
security provider to take out an insurance policy with a particular
insurer;

b) shall be prohibited from imposing any unreasonable requirement

regarding what insurance a financial consumer or security

provider must take out; and

c) shall disclose separately any requirement for insurance in

advance, if not, such subsequent requirement shall not bind the
\

financial consumer.

5.1.5. Unfair credit-related practices

Fiyancial services providers shall:

/
5.1.5.1.

5.15.2,

5.L5.3.

5.1.5.4.

5.1.5.5.

5.1.5.6.

5.1.5.7.

be prohibited from charging a financial consumer an interest in

advance;

charge interest only based on an annual percentage applied to the

unpaid balance of the loan;

charge a higher rate of default interest, as agreed at the time of

contract, only on the amount of loan that is in default;

accept any partial early repayment of a loan and credit it to the loan

balance as soon as reasonably practicable;

allow a financial consumer to repay outstanding loan at any time
with permitted fees and charges disclosed at the time of concluding

he contract;

provide a financial consumer on request with a statement that

discloses details of the amount owed; and

be prohibited from enforcing a financial consumer contract or
security unless they have given a notice of default allowing at least

30 days for credit contracts involving immovable collaterals, or at

east 10 business days for credit contracts involving movable

collaterals.

5.1.6. Debt collection

VA. aA

5.1.6.1.

5.1.6.2;

A financial service provider shall not harass, or engage in any other
unfair or abusive conduct, towards a financial consumer, a security
provider or any other person for the purpose of recovering any debt

owed in connection with a financial product or service.

Notwithstanding sub-article 5.1.6.1 hereinabove, harassment and
other unfair or abusive conduct prohibited by this Article includes
the following conduct except to the extent required or expressly

permitted by law:
a) communicating a financial consumer or security provider before
and after the business hours of the financial service provider;

b) unnecessary contact or communication with a person, going
beyond what is reasonable in the circumstances;

c) seeking payment of a debt from someone other than the financial
consumer or security provider liable for the debt;

d) disclosing the existence of a debt to a third party without the
consent of the financial consumer;

e) making any misrepresentation in connection with a debt, such as

regarding its character, the amount owed, the financial service

provider’s legal rights or the potential legal consequences for
any person if the debt is not paid;

f) public shaming, such as public disclosure of a debtor’s identity;
g) attending at a person’s place of employment to seek repayment;
h) threating to harm or harming any person;

i) threatening to seize, or seizing, property which has not been

provided as collateral; or

j) threatening to damage, or damaging, property.

5.1.6.3. Notwithstanding sub-article 5.1.6.2 (d) hereinabove, a financial
service provider may disclose the existence of a debt under a
financial consumer contract or security contract to a debt collector
acting on the financial service provider’s behalf or to a third party to
whom the financial service provider sells the debt, provided that the
financial service provider takes all reasonable steps to ensure that the
recipient of the information treats that information, and keeps it

confidential and secure, consistently with this directive.

5.1.6.4. a financial service provider shall be liable to and responsible for the
conduct of any party to whom the financial service provider has sold
a debt owing under a financial consumer contract or security contract
as if that conduct is undertaken by the financial service provider.

\
a financial service provider is required to have adequate controls and

appropriate training in place to ensure that any third party acting on

10

their behalf in relation to debt collection acts consistently with the

requirements of this Directive.

5.1.7. Unauthorized and mistaken transactions

Financial service providers shall:

SaleFele

5.1.7.2.

5.1.7.3.

5.1.7.4.

§.1,7.5.

effectively, before entering into service agreement, disclose to
financial consumers;

a) the situations constituting fraud or unauthorized or mistaken
transactions;

b) their obligations in such situations; and

c) limitations to liability for losses in such situations.

be held legally liable for breaches in data security that results in

osses for a consumer;

disclose to financial consumers that they are being compensated fully

or losses from unauthorized transactions, except in cases of

consumer fraud or gross negligence;

provide timely and necessary assistance to financial consumers to

recover mistakenly transferred funds; and

have clear procedures to deal with security breaches and supposedly
unauthorized transactions, including mechanisms to reimburse or

compensate the financial consumer for losses.

5.2. Transparency and disclosure requirements

5.2.1. Advertising and promotional materials

Financial services providers shall ensure that any advertising or other promotional

materials about the financial products and services:

S211.

5.2.1.2.

L~ CA,

shall be accurate, simple and clearly expressed;

shall not be misleading or deceptive;

11
$21.3; if it includes a reference to any advantage or benefit of the financial
product or service, it also includes appropriately balanced reference

to the risks;

5.2.1.4, shall specify the name, license and registration number;

§.2.1.5. if it includes any reference to an interest rate of any type, discloses
the rate as an annual percentage rate and not, for example, a rate for
a shorter period; and

5.2.1.6. shall disclose other fees and costs ,if any.

5.2.2. Form and manner of disclosure
Financial service providers shall ensure that any information, contract or notice provided
to a financial consumer or security provider in relation to financial products and services
shall be:

5.2.2.1. easily legible;

5.2.2.2. simple and clearly expressed without use of technical language;

52.23) printed and displayed in a minimum font size of 12; and

5.2.2.4, available in Amharic, English and in regional working language

where the financial consumer is located.

§.2.3. Publications, availability and display of product pricing, terms and
conditions

5.2301. A financial service provider shall publish, display and make

available the standard terms and conditions including itemized fees

and annual percentage rate, in relation to all of their financial

products and services.

5.2:3:2% Financial services providers shall make available the terms and
conditions of the products and services referred to in sub-article

5.2.3.1 above:

12

5.2.3.3.

5.2.3.4,

a) in a prominent manner that allows the financial consumer or
security provider to retrieve and keep it for future reference ;

b) at any of their or their agents’ premises attended by the financial
consumers; and

c) display a prominent notice at such premises regarding the

availability of standard terms and conditions.

Financial services providers shall provide copies of the information
referred to in Article 5.2.3.1 above to financial consumers on

request.

The National Bank may, at its discretion, decide to publish
information relating to financial service providers and financial
products or services in any form or manner appropriate, for the
purpose of facilitating the ability of financial consumers to

understand and compare financial products or services.

5.2.4. Key Fact Statements (KFS)

CCK

5.2.4.1.

5.2.4.2.

A financial service provider shall provide to a financial consumer a
summary of up-to-date KFS, containing key generic information as
per the prescribed format attached, Annex III to Annex VII, as the
case may be, for any fixed term loan, accounts or insurance products
and services that it offers:
a) when a financial consumer requests or makes a general enquiry

regarding such financial products and services;

b) after a financial consumer communicates to the financial service

provider specific parameters and circumstances relating to
financial products and services it proposes to obtain; and

c) at the time of signing of contract for the product and services.

For the purpose of Article 5.2.4.1,the contents or key generic

information for KFSs shall be as per the prescribed formats of:

a) Annex III in relation to fixed term credit products;
b) Annex IV in relation to current and saving accounts;
c) Annex V in relation to mobile wallet accounts;

d) Annex VI in relation to time deposits ; and
13
5.2.4.3.

5.2.4.4,

5.2.4.5,

5.2.4.6.

5.2.4.7.

e) Annex VII in relation to insurance policies.

Financial services providers shall ensure that the KFSs provided to a
financial consumer or security provider in relation to financial
products and services shall be:

a) easily legible;

b) simple and clearly expressed without use of technical language;
c) printed and displayed in a minimum font size of 12; and

d) available in Amharic, English and in regional working language

where the financial consumer is located.

Financial services providers shall make available and display KFS:

a) in a prominent manner that allows the financial consumer or

security provider to retrieve and keep it for future reference ;

b) at any of their or their agents’ premises attended by the financial
consumers; and

c) display a prominent notice at such premises regarding the

availability of standard terms and conditions.

A financial service provider shall ensure that KFS for the final
contract are updated and signed by the financial service provider;
and as relevant, the financial consumer or any applicable third-party

security provider and form an integral part of the contract.

A financial service provider shall ensure that it give the financial
consumer adequate time between receipt of the KFS and the signing
of the contract or opening of the account to review the KFS and
obtain any verbal explanations regarding the financial product and

service from the provider staff.

A financial service provider shall provide to a security provider
proposing to give a security in relation to another financial
consumer’s fixed term loan a completed, up-to-date fixed term loan
KFS:

a) after receiving an application for the fixed term loan with

information customized for the borrower’s circumstances; and
14
5.2.4.8.

$.2.4.9.

b) at the time of signing of a loan contract for the product signed by
the financial service provider; and as relevant, the borrower or

any applicable third-party security provider.

A financial service provider:

a) shall not be required to provide a KFS to a financial consumer
where the financial consumer has not provided sufficient
information for the financial service provider to identify the
relevant financial product and service ; and

b) shall, however, provide to the financial consumer reasonable
assistance to identify the relevant financial products and

services.

Key Facts Statement (KFS) other than that specified in sub-article
5.2.4.2 of this Article and any amendments to the existing ones may

be prescribed by circulars of the National Bank.

5.2.5. Contents of contractual document (terms and conditions)

Financial service providers shall clearly and prominently disclose the following

information in the terms and conditions of the contract of any financial products and

services offered to consumers:

5.2.5.1.

5.2.5.2.

5.2.5.3.

5.2.5.4,

5,2:5,5.

COY

the financial service provider’s details: name, regulated status, any
applicable license or registration number issued to it by the National

Bank and contact details;

e key features of the financial product or service, including the

financial consumer’s benefits and rights;

he key risks to the financial consumer associated with the financial

product or service;

he key responsibilities of the financial consumer in connection with

es

he financial product or service;

he term of the contract, if any;

15
5.2.5.6.

5.2.5.7;

§.2:5.8.

5.2.5.9,

5.2.5.10.

5.2.5.11.

5.25.12.

fees and charges:
a) a description of all fees and charges;
b) the amount or basis of calculation of all fees and charges; and

c) the total amount of known fees and charges;

details of any changes which may be made to any term of the
financial consumer contract or any amount payable under the
contract and how the financial consumer will be informed of a

change;

details of any commission payable, if any, in respect of the financial
consumer contract, including the amount, and by and to whom the

commission is payable;

the circumstances in which the financial service provider will collect,
use and disclose a financial consumer’s data and how it will be kept

secure and the availability of further information in this regard;

the consumer consent for sharing credit information to Credit
Reference Bureau and Movable Collateral Registry Office of the
National Bank;

information regarding how a financial consumer can make a

complaint to the financial service provider;

contact information for any applicable external dispute resolution
service available to a financial consumer if they are not satisfied
regarding how a financial service provider has dealt with a

complaint;

the date of the relevant document; and

any additional information prescribed in this directive for specific

aspects of financial products or services.

UL kA 16

5.2.6. Additional content requirements — consumer credit contracts

The following additional information is prescribed in relation to consumer credit

contracts for the purposes of sub-article 5.2.5.14 hereinabove:

§.2.6.1.

5.2.6.2.

5.2.6.3.

5.2.6.4,

5.2.6.5.

5.2.6.6.

5.2.6.7.

the amount of credit or any applicable credit limit;

the nature and amount of any deduction from the proceeds of a loan

before it is disbursed to a financial consumer;

interest:

a) the current annual percentage rate(s) and how each applies;

b) the total amount of interest charges if known;

c) any applicable default rate of interest and when it will be
applied; and

d) the effective interest rate for the consumer credit contract;

repayments:

a) the amount of each repayment or the method of calculating the
amount if the amount is not known;
b) date each repayment is due;

c) the number of repayments; and

d) the total amount of repayments, if known;

the financial consumer’s rights to prepay a consumer credit contract;

details of any security which is to be provided;

details of any insurance to be financed by the consumer credit
contract including:
a) the name of the insurer;

b) the type of insurance;

c) the premium payable to the insurer and when it must be
paid;

d) any commission payable in respect of the insurance;

e) how claims may be made under the insurance policy; and

f) details of key risks covered and key exclusions.

17
5.2.6.8. if the loan was approved for a specific purpose, a description of that

purpose;

5.2.6.9. enforcement expenses which may be charged following default.

5.2.7. Additional contractual disclosure requirements — deposit

value product

account or stored

The following additional information is prescribed for the purposes of sub-article 5. 2.5.14

hereinabove in relation to any financial product or service that include:

or stored value facility:

S275: interest (if any) including:

s a deposit account

a) the current annual percentage rate(s) and how each applies; and

b) the total amount of interest , if known;

5.2072: any minimum balance requirement;

5.2.7.3; any applicable cost for early termination of the financial product or

service; and

5.2.7.4. withdrawal options.

5.2.8. Additional content requirements — payment or funds transfer product

The following additional information shall be prescribed for the purposes of sub-article

5.2.5.14 hereinabove in relation to financial product or service that includes a payment or

funds transfer facility:
5.2.8.1. any limits and restrictions on transactions and
such as limits on the value or number of transac

restrictions or instrument expiration dates;

product operation,

ions, geographical

5.2.8.2. the procedures that will apply in the even

of unauthorized

transactions or transaction errors, including contact details and each

party’s responsibility and liability for losses; and

5.2.8.3. a financial consumer’s responsibilities regarding prudent use and

contact details incase of their loss or compromise.

(aA

safeguarding of identifiers and payment instruments, including

18
5.2.9, Additional content requirements — insurance policy

$.2.9.1,

The following additional information is prescribed for the purposes
of sub-article 5.2.5./4 hereinabove in relation to any insurance
policy:

a) the type of insurance;

b) insured risks;

c) insurance premiums and other fees

d) key exclusions;

e) the amount of cover;

f) the applicable period of cover;

g) the name and contact details of any insured person;

h) a description of any insured property; and

i) claims handling procedures.

5.2.10. Signing and provision of final contract

A financial service provider shall be prohibited from entering into, or seeking to enforce

against a financial consumer or security provider, any financial consumer contract or

security contract unless:

5.2.10.1.

5.2.10.2.

5.2.10.3.

5.2.10.4,

the contract shall be in writing and is signed by the financial
consumer or security provider or the contract in clearly specified and
verifiable electronic way acceptable by the financial consumer

accessing the credit;

the proposed contract was provided to the financial consumer or
security provider, a reasonable time before the contract was made, so

as to give an opportunity to review it before becoming bound.

a financial service provider shall provide a copy of the final financial
consumer contract or security contract for the financial consumer or
security provider immediately or as soon as practicable after the
financial consumer or security provider becomes bound by the

contract. and

expressly stated otherwise, the financial service provider shall

furnish the final contract document to the financial consumer or

19
security provider free of charge and it may be provided in any of the

following ways:

a) by giving it personally to the financial consumer or to the
security provider or their agents;

b) by sending it by post to the financial consumer’s or security
provider’s last known or nominated address; or

c) by sending it electronically to the financial consumer or to the

security provider or their agents.

5.2.11. Periodic statement

Financial services providers shall

5.2.11 1,

5.2.11.2.

$21.3,

5.2.11.4.

§.2.11.5.

5.2.11.6.

furnish, upon request, statement of account free of charge at least
once in a month and any time when the account is closed to the
financial consumer for any financial products or services;

furnish a periodic statement of account, upon request by charging a
reasonable fee if the request is different from what is stated under

sub-article 5.2.11.1 of this Article ;

ensure that periodic statements, depending on the type of financial
product, include information such as statement period; opening and

closing balances; details of each debit and credit transaction etc;

allow financial consumers to select the method in which they would

like to receive the statement e.g. in writing or electronically;

depending on the circumstance, periodic statements may be provided
by financial service providers to financial consumers, or security
providers or their agents in person, by post or via electronic means;

and

a financial service provider may comply sub-article 5.2.11.3
hereinabove in relation to a mobile wallet account by making
available to a financial consumer an electronic facility that allows the
financial consumer to access the information in a form that allows

the information.to be retrieved and kept for future reference.

20
5.2.12. Notification of changes

5.2.13. Payment receipts

§.2.12.1,

§.2.12.2.

§.2.12.3.

§.2.13.1,

§.2.13.2.

Financial services providers shall not make a change to a financial
consumer’s contract which increases the financial consumer’s
obligations, or adversely reduces the financial services providers
obligations to a financial consumer, unless it has given the financial
consumer prior notice of the change and secure the consent;

a) in the case of a change to a variable annual percentage rate, at

least 5 consecutive days’ notice of the details of the change; and

b) in any other case, at least 30 consecutive days’ notice of the

details of the change.

the consumer shall be aware of the existence of such requirements
before entering into the contract agreement and shall be included in

the contract agreement.

any contractual terms allowing the financial services providers to
make changes to a consumer’s contract without describing the
circumstances in which such changes shall be made or requiring

sufficient notice would be null and void.

Financial services providers shall provide a receipt for any payment
in respect of a financial product as soon as reasonably practicable

after the payment is received.

A receipt for any payment shall at least contain minimum contents,
depending on the type of the product such as the transaction number,
date, amount paid, information to identify the product or account,

contact details for queries or complaints etc.

5.2.14. Verbal explanations

Ltn

§.2.14.1.

The financial services providers shall explain the features, risks,
terms and cost of the financial products or services to a financial
consumer in a language he/she can understand:

a) if it is reasonably apparent that the financial consumer is

disabled, illiterate or cannot understand the financial product; or
21
5.2.14.2.

b) upon request.

The financial services providers shall give such an explanation a
reasonable time before the consumer may acquire the product and

keep a written record of the explanation.

5.3. Product suitability and responsible lending requirements

5.3.1. A financial service provider shall have in place, and follow, documented policies

5.3.2.

Se

and procedures to ensure products are designed, marketed and distributed to the

target market having appropriate regard to the likely financial objectives, needs,

capacity and behaviors of financial consumers in the target market with a view to

minimizing the risk of harm to those financial consumers;

The policies and procedures referred to in sub-article 5.3.1 of this Article shall

specify, at a minimum:

5.3.2.1.

§.3.2,2.

5.3,2,3:

5.3.2.4,

§.3.2.5:

OA

the steps that the financial service provider will take to define the
type(s) of financial consumers for whom a new (or modified)

financial product or service is intended;

the steps that the financial service provider will take to identify and
address potential risks of harm to those financial consumers and their
security providers, including relating to product or service features,

marketing, distribution, security and usage;

the financial service provider’s internal process for authorization and
introduction of new financial products or services (or product

modifications) for financial consumers;

the steps the financial service provider will take to monitor whether
its financial products and services are causing harm to financial

consumers and their security providers and take corrective action in

relation to their design, marketing or distribution if such harm is

identified; and

its internal decision makers for these purposes.

22
5:3.3.

5.3.4.

5.3.5.

5.3.6.

5.3.7.

5.3.8.

Financial services providers shall put in place, and apply, written policies and
procedures to determine whether a financial product provided to a specific
financial consumer is reasonably likely to meet their financial objectives, needs

and capacity.

The written policies and procedures referred to in sub-article 5.3.3 of this Article
shall specify, at a minimum, in relation to each kind of financial product or
service offered by the financial service provider, the steps they will take to
consider a financial consumer’s financial objectives, needs and capacity before

providing them with a financial product or service.

Financial services providers, before providing credit to a financial consumer,
including an increase in existing loan or a credit limit, shall undertake a
reasonable assessment of the ability of the consumer to repay the credit without

substantial hardship.

In some instances, however, given the simplicity and low-risk nature of a product
and unless specifically requested by the financial consumer or it is reasonably
obvious that the consumer is illiterate or cannot understand the financial product,
some basic products would be expressly exempt from requirements of sub-article
5.3.1 to sub-article 5.3.5 hereinabove. Such products may include:

5.3.6.1. mobile wallets;

5.3.6.2. basic “on demand” savings accounts with simple, easy to understand

features; and

§.3,6.3. the inclusion-focused micro insurance products.

Financial services providers shall take reasonable steps to verify the information

on which they rely to assess the financial consumer’s creditworthiness.

Every financial services provider shall be prohibited from sending unsolicited,

pre-approved offers of credit or credit limit increase to financial consumers.

23
5.4. Data protection requirements

Financial Services Providers shall:

5.4.1.

5.4.2.

5.4.3.

5.4.4.

5.4.5.

5.4.6.

put in place, and apply, policies and procedures to ensure the confidentiality and
security of financial consumers’ data and to do so consistently with this Directive

and other applicable requirements;

inform and make available to financial consumers and security providers
regarding their policies:

5.4.2.1. for protection of data;

5.4.2.2. for collection, use and disclosure of data;

5.4.2.3. on the kinds of data that it collects; and

5.4.2.4. on the third parties to whom it may disclose such data.

provide copies of the privacy policy referred to in sub-article 5.4.2 of this Article

to the financial consumers and security providers on request; and

make the privacy policy referred to in sub-article 5.4.2 hereinabove available

prominently on the financial service provider’s website.

protection of data
A financial service provider shall implement appropriate organizational, physical
and technical measures to ensure that data is protected against misuse,

unauthorized disclosure, accidental loss, destruction or damage.

Collection of data

A financial service provider shall collect a financial consumer’s or security provider’s

data only:

5.4.6.1. using lawful and fair means; and

5.4.6.2. for legitimate purposes necessary for the financial service provider’s

activities.

LA 24
5.4.7. Use of data

A financial service provider shall only use and disclose financial consumers and security
providers data consistently with the original purpose of collection or with the explicit and
informed consent of the financial consumer or otherwise required or permitted by this

Directive or other laws;

5.4.8. Treatment of data by third parties
Financial service providers shall take reasonable steps to ensure that any third party to
whom they disclose data (regardless of whether the third party acts on the financial

service provider’s behalf) keeps it confidential and secure and treats it consistently with

his directive.

5.4.9, Access to data
5.4.9.1. Financial service providers, on request from financial consumers or
security providers, shall give them the right to access their data, with
a reasonable time and no cost to the financial consumer or security

provider.

5.4.9.2. A financial service provider is not required to comply with a request
referred to in sub-article 5.4.9.1 of this Article to the extent that:
a) doing %o is otherwise prohibited by law;
b) the financial consumer or security provider's request is
legitimately excessive; or

c) the legitimate costs of doing so would be prohibitively high.

5.4.10. Correction of data
If financial consumers or security providers claim that any data about them held by a
financial service provider is inaccurate or incomplete, a financial service provider shall:

5.4.10.1. take reasonable steps to review the claim within a reasonable time;

5.4.10.2. if the data is demonstrated to be inaccurate or incomplete:
a) correct it within a reasonable time; and
b) take reasonable steps to advise any third party that has
access to inaccurate or incomplete data about the

correction.

25
5.5.

5.4.10.3. if, following its review, the financial service provider does not agree
that the data is inaccurate:
a) record the disagreement with the data; and
b) take reasonable steps to advise any third party that has access

to inaccurate or incomplete data about the disagreement.

5.4.10.4. consider and, where appropriate, action a financial consumer’s

request to correct their data.

5.4.11. Relevant provisions of “Establishment and Operation of Credit Reference
Bureau Directive No. CRB/02/2019”
The provisions of Directive Number CRB/02/2019 or any amendment thereto, which

have a bearing on financial consumer protection shall apply to the extent possible.

Complaint handling requirements
5.5.1. Policies and Procedures
Financial services providers shall put in place, and apply, policies and procedures for a

fair, accessible, transparent, free and efficient internal complaints handling;

5.5.2. Arrangements
Financial services providers shall:
§.5.2.1. establish Internal Complaint Handling Unit at the Head Office to
which financial consumers and security providers may refer a

complaint to;

5.5.2.2. The location of the Complaint Handling Office, full address, and
contact person and other related and relevant information shall

clearly be communicated to the financial consumer at the time of

concluding a contract;

§.5.2.3; ensure that a complainant can make a complaint, in any language as
referred to in sub-article 5.2.2.4 hereinabove and allow financial
consumers to make complaints through a variety of communications

/ channels such as telephone, electronic message, fax message, postal

4 aA 26
5.5.2.6.

5.5.2.7.

services and in person and actively inform consumers about their

ability to do so;

respond to the complainant in the same medium of communication
used for the complaint or any form most appropriate;
appropriately resource their internal complaints handling process and

train relevant staff;

as far as feasible, ensure that complaints handling staff are

independent from staff and functions subject to complaints; and

ensure that their staff and, if applicable, agents provide a
complainant with reasonable assistance to submit a complaint,
including, without limitation:

a) if it is reasonably apparent that a complainant is illiterate ;or

b) if the complainant is subject to a relevant disability or cannot

understand the process.

5.5.3. Process and time line

iV C4

5.5.3.1.

A financial consumer may submit complaints to the financial service
provider in relation to the financial products and services acquired

from it.

A financial service provider shall:

a) acknowledge receipt of the complaint promptly;

b) give each complaint it receives a unique tracking number and
advise the complainant of that number when they receive the
complaint;

c) investigate the complaint as soon as possible and advise the
complainant of the outcome of the complaint within a maximum
of 10 business days of receiving it. If, | however, lower number

of days for investigation of complaints by financial service

provider has been prescribed in relation to specific types of
financial products and services, by another directive of the
National Bank, such prescriptions shall apply in the investigation

of complaints in relation to such financial products and services.
27
5.5.3.3)

5.5.3.4.

ensure each complaints is addressed in an equitable, objective and

timely manner.

provide the complainant with written confirmation of the outcome of

the complaint, including:

a) any proposed resolution or settlement;

b) any reasons for rejecting the complaint;

c) any reasons for not having completed investigation of the
complaint within a period of time specified in sub-article 5.5.3.2
(c) hereinabove; and

d) contact information for any applicable dispute resolution service
available to the complaint if the complainant is not satisfied
regarding how the financial service provider has dealt with their

complaint.

5.5.4. Reporting unresolved cases to the National Bank and filing of complaint

5.5.4.1.

5.5.4.2.

5.5.4.3.

A financial consumer may submit the complaint to the National

Bank, if he/it:

a) is not satisfied with the decisions given by the concerned
financial service provider ;or

b) has not received response from the concerned financial service
provider in line with sub-article 5.5.3.2(c) and sub-article

5.5.3.4 hereinabove.

n cases where the financial service provider is unable to resolve the
complaint through internal complaint handling processes within a
period of time as specified under sub-article 5.5.3.2 (c) of this
Article, the case shall be reported to the National Bank within two

business days as per the template attached in Annex II;

Up on receipt of a case as per sub-article 5.5.4.1 and 5.5.4.2

ereinabove the National Bank shall investigate the case within 10

business days. If, however, lower number of days for investigation of
complaints has been prescribed in relation to specific types of

financial products And services by another directive of the National

28

LOA
5.5.4.4,

Bank, such prescriptions shall apply in the investigation of

complaints in relation to such financial products and services; and

As a resolution to complaints the decision passed by the National
Bank shall be binding on the financial services provider but optional

to the financial consumer;

5.5.5. Complaints database

A financial service provider shall:

5)5:5:1, ensure that at least monthly reports are provided to their board on the
volume and nature of complaints received, the extent to which they
have been resolved and the related root causes and systemic issues
that they identify;

§.5.5.2. be responsible to keep up to date records of complaints and provide
monthly reports about the complaints to the National Bank as per the

template attached in Annex I;

§:5.5.3) ensure records of complaints referred in sub-article 5.5.5.2
hereinabove include at least:

a) the date a complaint is lodged;

b) the name and contact details of the complainant;

c) the name and contact details of relevant staff members handling
the complaint;

d) details of the outcome of the complaint, including any settlement
provided to a complainant and any reasons given if a complaint
is not resolved in the complainant’s favor; and

e) any other information necessary in order for the financial service
provider to be able to meet any reporting requirements imposed
by the National Bank.

6. Good governance, compliance and risk management

6.1. Board of directors

The board of directors shall:

bah

29
6.1.1.

6.1.2.

6.1.3.

6.1.4.

6.1.5.

6.1.6.

6.2. Senior management

approve appropriately detailed policies and procedures, and submit to the
National Bank , that ensure effective implementation and compliance of this

directive within three months from the issuance of this directive;

ensure that the Internal Complaint Handling Unit shall have reasonably adequate
resources such as office, human resources, office equipment such as telephone,

personal computer, fax, etc.. to enable it discharge the responsibility bestowed to

the financial service provider in this directive;

ensure that the goals of financial consumer protection should be clearly

articulated in the terms of reference for the board and management committees;

monitor compliance with this directive and internal policies, and procedures
referred to in sub-article 6.1.1 hereinabove and receives regular reports from

senior management for the purpose;

ensure that the financial service provider shall report periodically, or as may be

required , on the execution status of this directive, to the National Bank; and

for the purpose of this directive, be liable and responsible for the conduct of its
staff, agents and any other persons acting on the financial service provider’s

behalf in relation to financial products and services.

Senior management of the financial service provider shall be responsible for:

6.2.1:

6.2.2.

6.2.3.

6.2.4.

effective implementation of this directive;

setting out detailed policies and procedures for ongoing compliance with this

directive;

identifying the products and services that carry the greatest risk for the non-

compliance and execution of this directive;

providing solutions to issues that affect financial consumers; and

30

oA
L

6.3.

6.4.

6.2.5.

overseeing any agents and/or third parties by or through which the financial
service provider provides financial consumers with financial products and

services.

Professional competence

Financial service providers shall:

6.3.1.

6.3.2.

6.3.3.

6.3.4.

6.3.5,

adequately train their employees, agents and third parties on the provisions of

this directive, customer handling, their internal policies and procedures;

ensure that the sales staff and agents are competent and adequately trained to

fulfill the requirements of this directive;

ensure that the remuneration they pay to their sales staff and agents doesn’t

incentivize them to act inconsistently with this directive;

adequately supervise their agents to ensure that they comply with the provisions

of this directive; and

in cases where financial products and services are outsourced to a third party,
shall ensure that the third party complies, as far as applicable, with the provisions

of this directive.

Reporting to the National Bank

A financial Service provider shall:

6.4.1.

6.4.2.

provide any information the National Bank requires in relation to financial

products or services and any related activities:

6.4.1.1. at any time, including any intervals, specified by the National
Bank; and
6.4.1.2. in the form, in any manner, and containing any information,

specified by the National Bank.

report complaints lodged, resolved and referred, monthly or as required to

National Bank, as per Annex I;

31
6.4.3. report any complaint not resolved to the National Bank within two business days

as per the Template for Complaints not Resolved (Annex II);

6.4.4. submit a copy of standard terms and conditions and detailed fees and charges,
KFS, and any other document (record) relating to the provision of financial
products and services ,annually, and whenever a change to such information is

made.

cs Record Keeping
7.1. Financial services providers shall retain copies of concluded contract documents, KFSs,
and other records relating to their provision of financial products or services for 10 years
or as may be required by relevant laws, from when that version ceased to be used or after

the business relationship has ended.

7.2. The documents specified in sub-article 7.1 of this Article shall be available for inspection

when required by the National Bank.

8. Other applicable directives
Any provisions of the Directive issued by the National Bank that have bearings to the protection of
financial consumers, as far as they are consistent with the provisions of this directive, shall be

enforceable.

9. Transitory arrangement

This directive shall be effective and in full force six months from the issue date.

10. Penalty for non-compliance
10.1. Financial institutions that fail to comply with the provisions of this Directive shall

be subject to a penalty of Birrl0,000 (ten Thousand Birr) for each violation.

10.2. The National Bank may, in addition to the penalty indicated under 10.1 herein above,

take any other measures it considers necessary.

il. Issue date

This directive shall enter into force as of the 25" day of August 2020.

32

a

“SUISIURYOOU YC 0} ASVd OY} JoJo1 10

[Osa 0} Joyo Ajpeusaqul sayey ure]duioo ay} Shep Jo Jaquunu ay} OF SIQJOY ,

“aq Aeul asked ayy

SB ,UNOD,, 0} UdYeI JO CACY) uonnjosay ayndsiq saNewoypy 10 YURY JLUONBN oY} 0} PoLaJoY,, 1O JOR} UO,, 10 .PIAJOSOY,, JOYS saseo jUrE[dwoo oO} sioJos SNILIS ,

d1Nj{VUSIS
aed
AIO IY} JO oueN
qure;duios oe “9
ou) ee “oN paspo|
Surjpuey onssi snqeig posted sonss] jreurg OTIQo|| ouleN, uoneorpnuop] SeM ne
: oy skep | | : : ! I I staeruieey
jgeas 0 ON qure;duiop Sui
JO OWEN : queure;duiog

40 HINOW AHL You
YACGIAONd AOIANAS TVIONVNIA
LvYOdda ONIIGNVH LNIVId WOO

‘| XUNNV

ANNEX II:
TEMPLATE FOR COMPLAINT NOT RESOLVED
FINANCIAL SERVICE PROVIDER
FOR THE MONTH OF

1. Date the complaint lodged

Name of the complainant

Complaint identification No.

Name of employee handling the complaint

we & NI

Details of the Complaint

6. Number of days the issue takes

Ts Reasons for not resolving the complaint
8. Any comment

Name of the Officer

Date

Signature

KOA
ANNEX I

KEY FACTS STATEMENT FOR FIXED TERM LOAN

KEY FACTS STATEMENT FOR FIXED TERM LOAN

Carefully review this document if you are considering a fixed term loan.

You can use this document to compare loans from different providers.

Loan provider: [Name of FSP] Product: [Name of loan product] Date: [Date prepared]

KEY FEATURES OF THE LOAN

LOAN SUMMARY COST OF LOAN
1, Amount of Your 5. Total Interest | Birr
Loan Total interest you will
Amount you are | Birr be charged on the loan | Interest per
borrowing year %
2. Amount You Will 6. Total Fees and | Birr ‘
Receive Charges
Amount. you will See below for a list of
receive after upfront fees and charges
fees and charges are | Birr
deducted
3. Loan Term 7. Annual Percent Cost _%
Period of time you of Your Loan | per year"
have to repay your Annual cost of your
loan loan as a percentage,
including interest, fees
and charges
4. Repayment Amount | Birr per 8. Total Cost of Your |Birr Mt
and Frequency [time period] Loan
Amount you repay All costs for the loan
at regular intervals (including total
interest and fees and
charges)
1. Amount of | | 2. Total Cost of Your 3: TOTAL
Your Loan | Loan AMOUNT YOU
Amount you are All costs for the loan WILL PAY
borrowing (including total interest Total amount you
+ and total fees and |= pay after making
charges) all repayments
Birr Birr Birr

COM
RISKS TO YOU

* The details in this document are accurate as of today. The final terms of your loan may
be different if you borrow at a later date. *

* If you have a variable interest rate, this means your repayment amount and the
total amount you have to repay may change during your loan term. *

* Late or missing payments may result in late payment charges or loss of your collateral,
and may be reported on your credit record, which can harm your ability to borrow in the
future. *

* You are required to comply with all conditions in your loan contract, including
regarding use of the loan proceeds. Non-compliance may be a breach of your contract. *

SRA
IMPORTANT TERMS AND CONDITIONS TO CONSIDER”
LATE PAYMENT
CHARGES OTHER TERMS AND CONDITIONS
O Late fees if Birr | Collateral: You are O Variable interest
payment is more committing the rate applies
than [ ] days late: following property as
collateral:

Default interest if |__% per|O Bundled products: O Cash deposit account
payment is more year on| You are required to /mandatory savings:
han [ ] days late he purchase the following

amount in order to receive
overdue your loan:
O Other terms and
conditions: *
LIST OF UPFRONT FEES AND CHARGES
cr RECURRING FEES AND
UPFRONT FEES AND CHARGES CHARGES"
O Application | Birr O Collateral fee [Birr O Maintenance / | Birr
fee service fee per
Oo Credit | Birr O Stamp duty Birr Qa Credit life | Birr
history check | insurance per
O Credit life | Birr Oo [All other Birr ia] Collateral | Birr
insurance upfront fees and Birr insurance per
charges] Birr Qo [All other | Birr
recurring fees and | per
charges]
TOTAL UPFRONT AND RECURRING FEES AND CHARGES OVER YOUR | Birr
LOAN TERM (EXCLUDING INTEREST)

YOUR RIGHTS AS A CUSTOMER

> You have the right to get a copy of the full loan contract before you get your loan.

> Do you have any questions or complaints? Call [TELEPHONE], email [EMAIL ADDRESS],
write to [MAILING ADDRESS], or visit [WEBSITE] to contact us regarding your question or
complaint.

» If you are unsatisfied with how your complaint is handled: You can contact the National Bank
of Ethiopia (Indicate email , phone and specific location)

> [Want to pay off your loan early? You can do so without any penalties.]""

Ca

CERTIFIED CORRECT:

1 ACKNOWLEDGE RECEIPT
OF THIS STATEMENT PRIOR
TO SIGNING THE LOAN

I ACKNOWLEDGE
RECEIPT OF THIS
STATEMENT PRIOR TO

CONTRACT:* SIGNING THE
GUARANTEE:*
Loan provider's representative Borrower Guarantor
Name: Name: Name:
Date: Date: Date:

Application number:

Additional instructions:

"Total Fees and Charges: This amount must be the same as the “Total Upfront and Recurring Fees and Charges
Over Your Loan Term” amount above. It should include all known up
charges that will recur throughout the term of the loan, including fees and charges for mandatory, bundled third-
party services (where the amount is known).
culate the annual percentage rate calculated in accordance with the

" Annual Percent Cost of Your Loan: Ca
formula and assumptions.
" Total Cost of Your Loan: Calculate this

amount consistently with t

front fees and charges and all known fees and

e assumption.

“ Important terms and conditions to consider: Include key terms and conditions, particularly those that pose risks
products, late payment penalties, variable interest rates, collateral

to consumers, including mandatory bundle

requirements and charges resulting from early repayment of the loan (to the extent these are

ermitted — note that

such a charge will be permitted only to the extent it reflects loss arising from a difference between a fixed annual
percentage rate payable under the contract and the current market rate

permitted in relation to variable rates).
* Other important terms: Describe any ot
obvious from the name of the product.

er key terms of the credit product, particularly t

or fixed term loans of that type. It is not

ose which are not

“ Upfront fees and charges: List, on an itemized basis, all known upfront fees and charges, including fees and

charges for mandatory, bundled third-party services. Some possible examples have been inc
examples that are not applicable and list any other upfront fees and charges not already specified.
™ Recurring fees and charges: List, on an itemized basis, all known fees and charges that wi

uded. Omit any of these

| recur throughout the

term of the loan and the period of recurrence, including fees and charges for mandatory, bundled third-party

services. Some key examples have been included. Omit any of these examples that are not app

other recurring fees and charges not already specified.

“Include only if applicable.

™ Consumer signature: Include only in Key Facts Statement that is required to be provided

enters into a fixed term credit contract.

icable and list any

before the consumer

* Guarantor signature: Include only in Key Facts Statement that is required to be provided to guarantor before the
consumer enters into a fixed term credit contract.

vi

ANNEX IV

KEY FACTS STATEMENT FOR CURRENT AND SAVINGS ACCOUNTS

KEY FACTS STATEMENT FOR CURRENT OR SAVINGS ACCOUNT

Carefully review this document if considering a current or savings account.
Use it to compare products from different providers.

Account provider: [Name of institution] Product name: [Name of account product] Date:

[Date prepared]

WARNING: The information is current at the above date. Services, fees and interest rates

may change.

ACCOUNT FEATURES

Minimum balance

Transaction limits

Overdraft (for current accounts only)

Passbook

To open an account: _ Birr / None
_To keep the account: __ Birr / None
None / This account is subject to the following
ransaction limits: |
Available O Not available
Overdraft limit: Birr
Overdraft interest rate: _% per year
Overdraft application fee: Birr
On-going overdraft service fee: __ Birr per
___ [specify frequency e.g. monthly]
Other overdraft fees: [specify each fee and
amount |

O Available

O Not available

Additional product information"

FEES"
Opening the account

No fee/ Birr

Maintaining the account

No fee/__ Birr per __ [specify frequency e.g. monthly] /__ %
of your account balance

Debit card / ATM card

First debit / ATM card: No fee/ Birr

O Available Replacement debit / ATM card: No fee/ __Birr
O Not available
Cheque facility Cheque book No fee /__ Birr per cheque
D1 Available Cheque dishonour fee No fee/__ Birr
O Not available Stop cheque fee No fee/___ Birr
Special clearance fee No fee /__ Birr

Cash withdrawals
O Available
O Not available

Branch withdrawal: No fee/__ Birr/ __ % of withdrawal
Using our ATMs: No fee/__ Birr/__ % of withdrawal

Using another institution’s ATM: No fee/__ Birr/__ % of
withdrawal

Sending funds
O Available
O Not available

Via a branch: No fee/__ Birr/ __ % of transfer amount
Via our ATM: No fee/___Birr/__% of transfer amount
Via _another’s ATM: No fee / Birr / %_ of transfer

vii

CC h4

amount

Via mobile banking: No fee/__Birr/__% of amount

Payments for goods and | Payment via mobile banking: No fee / Birr /  % of
services amount

O Available Payment at point of sale (POS) using ATM/debit card: No
O Not available fee/_ Birr/__ % of amount

Standing order No fee/__ Birr/ __ % of order amount

O Available

C1 Not available

Duplicate statement of | Nofee/ Birr

account

O Available

O Not available

Balance inquiry Via a branch: No fee/ Birr

O Available Via our ATMs: No fee/ ___ Birr

0 Not available Via another institution’s ATMs: No fee/ Birr

Via mobile banking: No fee /__ Birr

Account closure

Birr

Other fees

WARNING: Fees other than those listed above may apply
to your account. Itemized information about all fees is
available in a printed form or on our website at ... [specify link
to website page| and is accessible from all our branches, agents
and other premises attended by customers.

INTEREST ON ACCOUNT BALANCES

Interest
balances?

paid on

account

YES/NO”

Interest rate

__ % per annum fixed / variable*

Calculation
interest

and payment

of | Interest is calculated on the balance in your account
[specify relevant date / time period e.g. daily / at the end
of the last business day of the month / calendar year] and
is credited to your account __ [specify when the crediting
will take place e.g. on the next business day]

Example

Based on the current interest rate, this means for every
1,000 Birr you deposit for 12 months you would receive
Birr in interest

HOW LONG DO FUNDS TRANSFERS TAKE?"

Sending funds

Domestic transfers

Transfers to another account: [Immediately] [Up to X business days]
International transfers

Transfers to another account: [Immediately] [Up to X business days]

Receiving funds

Domestic transfers

Transfers from another account: [Immediately] [Up to X business days]
International transfers

Transfers from another account: [Immediately] [Up to X business. days]

/
viii

Lak

|

Other things you should know

>» Requirements when opening this account: To open the account you will need to satisfy

some identification requirements. These can include providing documents and information to

verify your identity. Please ask the account provider for more details.

>» What happens if you do not use this account for a long period? If you do not make any

transaction for __ months, your account will be treated as [inactive / dormant] and _“",

» Closing this account: To close your account, you should contact __

vii

vill

Where can you get assistance or complain?

» Do you have any questions or complaints? Call [TELEPHONE], email [EMAIL
ADDRESS}, write to [MAILING ADDRESS], or visit [WEBSITE] to contact us regarding

your question or complaint:

>» If you are unsatisfied with how a complaint is handled: You can contact the National

Bank of Ethiopia (Indicate email , phone and specific location)

CERTIFIED CORRECT: I ACKNOWLEDGE RECEIPT OF THIS
STATEMENT PRIOR TO SIGNING THE
ACCOUNT CONTRACT*

Account provider's representative Customer

Name: Name:

Date: Date:

Application number:

Additional instructions:

' Transaction limits: Describe any transaction limits including for individual transactions e.g. any daily / monthly
limit on withdrawals or payments and any international transaction limits. Each category of limit should be
specified. Note when withdrawals may not be available (or limited) for an account (e.g., if applicable, a compulsory
savings account long term savings account with restrictions or a special purpose savings account).

" Other information: Describe any other key features of the account, particularly those which are not obvious from
the name of the product — e.g., for savings accounts there may be a need to describe products such as long term
savings accounts, compulsory savings accounts, insurance savings accounts, matching fund deposits (‘box saving’)
and provident fund savings products as well as savings accounts where the balance can be used as collateral towards
a loan. If the account may be maintained in a foreign currency this should also be)specified. Finally, specify if the

i cA

account may be linked with another account (such as a cheque account linked with a savings account so that the
linked account balance can be used to cover a cheque if there are insufficient funds in the cheque account).

" General fees: If a fee varies depending on the circumstances, such as based on account usage or balance, then the
circumstances in which this is the case need to be made clear - e.g. if there are a number of free transactions (such as
for deposits, withdrawals or transfers) in a month, if a transaction fee may be reduced, waived or refunded
depending on the balance in an account, if a fee varies depending on the amount or if a fee varies depending on
whether the transaction takes place at an agent or a branch or via an ATM (including an ATM of another provider).
“ Interest paid on account balances: Delete whichever does not apply. If “YES” then the details that follow must
be completed. If “NO”, the rows that follow should be deleted.
“Interest rate: Specify current interest rate(s) (including if any are fixed for any period), and any applicable scale
e.g. based on the balance.
“ Transfers: Specify if the time will vary depending on whether the transfers are to or from an account with the
same account provider or to or from an account with another provider; or if the time will vary depending on whether
the transfer is a domestic or international transfer.
“Inactive account: Specify consequences of having an inactive account e.g. whether the account will be closed
after a specified period and any fee that may be payable.

“" Contact for account closure: Specify contact details.

* Contact information: Specify all channels which can be used by the consumer and contact details - e.g. phone,
email, branch offices, social media.

* Consumer signature: Include only in Key Facts Statement that is required to be provided to a consumer before
they sign an account contract.

RA
ANNEX V
KEY FACTS STATEMENT FOR MOBILE WALLET ACCOUNT

KEY FACTS STATEMENT FOR MOBILE WALLET ACCOUN’

Carefully review this document if considering a mobile wallet account.
Use it to compare products from different providers.

Account provider: [Name of institution] Product name: [Name of account product] Date:
[Date prepared]
WARNING: The information is current at the above date. Services and fees may change.

ACCOUNT FEATURES
Minimum balance To open an account: __ Birr / None
; To keep the account: __ Birr / None
Maximum balance __ Birr / None
Transaction limits None / This account is subject to the following

transaction limits: __'
_Additional product information"

INTEREST ON ACCOUNT BALANCES

Interest paid on account | YES/NO"

balances?

Interest rate __ % per annum fixed / variable”

Calculation and payment of | Interest is calculated on the balance in your account
interest [specify relevant date / time period e.g. daily / at the end

of the last business day of the month / calendar year] and |
is credited to your account ___ [specify when the crediting
will take place e.g. on the next business day]

Example Based on the current interest rate, this means for every
1,000 Birr you deposit for 12 months you would receive
Birr in interest

Opening the account No fee/__ Birr

Maintaining the account No fee/ Birr per __ [specify frequency e.g. monthly] /__
% of your account balance

Cash deposits No fee/__ Birr/ _ % of amount

O Available OR

C1 Not available __ Birr for deposits between __ Birr and ___ Birr [specify
all fees which vary depending on the amount of the
transaction]

Cash withdrawals No fee/ Birr /__ % of amount

O Available OR

O Not available __ Birr for withdrawals between __ Birr and __ Birr
[specify all fees which vary depending on the amount of the
transaction|

Sending money “' No fee/___ Birr/__% of amount

xi

4 aN
O Available
0 Not available

OR
__ Birr for transfers between __ Birr and ___ Birr [specify

fee for each part of range]

Receiving money
O Available
O Not available

No fee/ Birr /__ % of amount
OR
__ Birr for receipts between Birr and __ Birr [specify all

fees which vary depending on the amount of the

transaction]
Bill payment No fee/__ Birr/_— % of amount
OR

__ Birr for bill payments between __ Birr and __ Birr
[specify all fees which vary depending on the amount of the

transaction|

Other payments (such as to a|Nofee/_ Birr /__ % of amount

retailer) OR

O Available __ Birr for payments between __ Birr and ___ Birr [specify

O Not available all fees which vary depending on the amount of the
transaction]

Duplicate statement of account | No fee/ Birr

O Available

O Not available

Balance inquiry No fee/ Birr

O Available

C1 Not available

Account closure Birr

Other fees

WARNING: Fees other than those listed above may
apply to your account. Itemized information about all fees
is available in a printed form or on our website at ...
[specify link to website page| and is accessible from all our
branches, agents and other premises attended by customers.

HOW LONG DO FUNDS TRANSFERS TAKE?”"

Sending funds Domestic transfers

Transfers to another account: [Immediately] [Up to X business days]

International transfers
Transfers to another account: [Immediately] [Up to X business days]

Receiving funds Domestic transfers

Transfers from another account: [Immediately] [Up to X business days]

International transfers
Transfers from another account: [Immediately] [Up to X business days]

xii

Other things you should know

» Requirements when opening this account: To open the account you will need to satisfy
some identification requirements. These can include providing documents and information to
verify your identity. Please ask the account provider for more details.

>» What happens if you do not use this account for a long period? If you do not make any
transaction for __ months, your account will be treated as [inactive / dormant] and a

ix

> Closing this account: To close your account, you should contact __

Where can you get assistance or complain?

>» Do you have any questions or complaints? Call [TELEPHONE], email [EMAIL
ADDRESS], write to [MAILING ADDRESS], or visit [WEBSITE] to contact us regarding
your question or complaint: *

> If you are unsatisfied with how a complaint is handled: You can contact the National

Bank of Ethiopia the National Bank of Ethiopia (Indicate email , phone and specific location)

CERTIFIED CORRECT: | ACKNOWLEDGE RECEIPT OF THIS
STATEMENT PRIOR TO SIGNING
THE ACCOUNT CONTRACT"
Account provider's representative Customer
Name: Name:
Date: Date:
Application number:

Additional instructions:

‘Transaction limits: Describe any transaction limits including for individual transactions e.g. any daily / monthly

limit on withdrawals or payments and any international transaction limits. Each category of limit should be

specified.

" Other information: Describe any other key features of the account, particularly those which are not obvious from

the name of the product — e.g., if the mobile wallet may be linked with another account (such as a savings account).
" Interest paid on account balances: Delete whichever does not apply. If “YES” then the details that follow must

be completed. If “NO”, the rows that follow should be deleted.

“ Interest rate: Specify current interest rate(s) (including if any are fixed for any period), and any applicable scale

e.g. based on the balance.

“ General fees: Ifa fee varies depending on the circumstances, such as based on account usage or balance, then the

circumstances in which this is the case need to be made clear - e.g. if there are a number of free transactions (such as

xiii

MA
for deposits, withdrawals or transfers) in a month, if a transaction fee may be reduced, waived or refunded
depending on the balance in an account, if a fee varies depending on the amount or if a fee varies depending on
whether the transaction takes place at an agent or a branch or via an ATM (including an ATM of another provider).
“ Sending money: Make it clear if a if a fee for sending money varies depending on whether the recipient is a
customer of the same mobile wallet provider or not.

“Transfers: Specify if the time will vary depending on whether the transfers are to or from an account with the
same account provider or to or from an account with another provider; or if the time will vary depending on whether
the transfer is a domestic or international transfer.

“ Inactive account: Specify consequences of having an inactive account e.g, whether the account will be closed
after a specified period and any fee that may be payable.

“ Contact for account closure: Specify contact details.

“Contact information: Specify all channels which can be used by the consumer and contact details - e.g. phone,
email, branch offices, social media.

“ Consumer signature: Include only in Key Facts Statement that is required to be provided to a consumer before
they sign an account contract. /

L~

xiv
ANNEX VI

KEY FACTS STATEMENT FOR TIME DEPOSIT ACCOUNT

KEY FACTS STATEMENT FOR TIME DEPOSIT ACCOUNT

Carefully review this document if considering a Time Deposit account.
Use it to compare products from different providers.

Account provider: [Name of institution] Product name: [Name of account product] Date:

[Date prepared]

WARNING: The information is current at the above date. Services, fees and interest rates

may change.

ACCOUNT FEATURES

Time deposit period

Minimum balance

Passbook

Additional product information"

The deposit account must be maintained for _
months / years

If the deposit is withdrawn early, then’ __

To open anaccount: Birr / None

To keep the account: __ Birr / None

O Available O Not available

INTEREST ON ACCOUNT BALANCES

Interest rate

__ % per annum fixed / variable"

Calculation and payment of interest Interest is calculated on the balance in your

account [specify relevant date / time period e.g.
daily / at the end of the last business day of the
month / calendar year| and is credited to
youre account __ [specif when
the crediting will take place e.g. on the next

business day]

Example Based on the current interest rate, this means for
every 1,000 Birr you deposit for 12 months you
would receive ___ Birr in interest

FEES”

Opening the account

No fee/ Birr

Maintaining the account

No fee/ Birr per ___ [specify frequency e.g. monthly] /__
% of your account balance

Cash withdrawals
Available
Not available

Branch withdrawal: No fee/__Birr/__ % of withdrawal

Available

Oo
O
Duplicate statement of account
Oo
01 Not available

No fee/ Birr

Balance inquiry
O Available
O Not available

Via a branch: No fee/ Birr

Via our ATMs: No fee/ __ Birr

Via another institution’s ATMs: No fee /__ Birr
Via mobile banking: No fee/ _ Birr

XV

Kea, Boek

Account closure Birr

Other fees WARNING: Fees other than those listed above may
apply to your account. Itemized information about all fees
is available in a printed form or on our website at ...
[specify link to website page| and is accessible from all our
branches, agents and other premises attended by customers.

Other things you should know

> Requirements when opening this account: To open the account you will need to satisfy
some identification requirements. These can include providing documents and information to
verify your identity. Please ask the account provider for more details.

>» What happens at the end of the fixed deposit period? [Provide a brief explanation of what
happens at maturity — e.g. what notice the consumer will receive regarding the upcoming
maturity of the time deposit and what happens to the deposit funds if the consumer does not
withdraw the funds at that time]

Where can you get assistance or complain?

> Do you have any questions or complaints? Call. [TELEPHONE], email [EMAIL
ADDRESS], write to [MAILING ADDRESS], or visit [WEBSITE] to contact us regarding
your question or complaint:”

> If you are unsatisfied with how a complaint is handled: You can contact the National
Bank of Ethiopia (Indicate email , phone and specific location)

CERTIFIED CORRECT: I ACKNOWLEDGE RECEIPT OF THIS
STATEMENT PRIOR TO SIGNING THE
ACCOUNT CONTRACT"

Account provider's representative Customer

Name: Name:

Date: Date:

Application number:

Additional instructions:

' Early withdrawals: Specify consequences, including any fee or forfeiture of interest.

" Other information: Describe key features of account, especially those which are not obvious from the name of the
product.

"Interest rate: Specify current interest rate(s), and any applicable scale e.g. based on the balance or the length of
the time deposit.

“ General fees: If a fee varies depending on the circumstances, such as account usage or balance, then the
circumstances in which this is the case need to be made clear - e.g. number of free cash withdrawals.

’ Contact information: Specify all channels which can be used by the accountholder and contact details - e.g.
phone, email, branch offices, social media.

“ Consumer signature: Include only in Key Facts Statement that is required to be provided to a consumer before
they sign an account contract.

ca

xvi

ANNEX VIL
INSURANCE POLICY KFS

Key Information about an Insurer

Insurer Name

Adress

Policy Holder Information

Policyholder Name

Adress

Prodcut Information

Type of Insurance Policy

Policy Period

Property/liablity covered

Name of the life asuured

Sum insured/assured

Maximum Indeminity/ Benifit

Exess”

Insurance Premium (after all discusntes)

Main policy exclusions (General and

specific)

Major policy conditions

In case of claim- estimated time the

process takes

Signed By

Date

ADDITIONAL NOTE ;
vi. An excess is the first amount payable by the policyholder in the event of a loss, and is the uninsured portion of
the loss.

xvii

Cu

