4,
aa linn,
PTL
“mui

iy

Mh,

ee)

@
eee o
000920046,

oe,

2

0009999074, %e,
2

Ape oS aa ddidad ts hoo)
00000 0G IIIIIEL i, 2s
000000009 FF a“zis
000000 09OIT a tits
900000000999, Gb 25s
OOOO ae
000 009ttl yee : p<
0888s sstl liye os
LL he :
ey, és dy,
Coaassitliyy We
OO is Wt a

Pst 4g e
Bassi llyhiitay,
sora ilyyt te, * 0

seas mig, oye,
eaasslintttay ta me
minty ay ary ss
assist, ", '
at, uf
i] t get,
‘ a? 4a,
Q ue i a
‘
ve een,
’ eee toy q

oe, }
PO ee :

NATIONAL BANK OF ETHIOPIA
FOREIGN EXCHANGE

DIRECTIVE NO. FXD/01/2024

JULY 2024

Ndeék Va
NATIONAL BANK
OF ETHIOPIA

PA.TEAL

nbe.gov.et
BANK og
se 4
 
 
 
2 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
PART ONE: GENERAL PROVISIONS 
4 
1. Title 
2. Definitions 
3. Scope of Application 
PART TWO : FOREIGN EXCHANGE MARKET PARTICIPANTS AND 
OPERATIONS 
13 
4. Role of Banks and Authorized Foreign Exchange Dealers 
5. Exchange rate determination 
6. Foreign exchange retention  
PART THREE : EXPORTS, IMPORTS, AND SERVICES 
16 
7. Export of goods  
8. Import of goods  
9. Service transactions  
PART FOUR : FOREX BUREAU OPERATIONS, REMITTANCES, AND 
PAYMENT INSTRUMENTS 
20 
10. Forex bureau  
11. International remittances 
12. Payment instruments: foreign cards, cash, and others  
PART FIVE: FOREIGN CURRENCY ACCOUNTS 
33 
13. FCY Accounts for Foreign Entities: FDI Companies, International 
Organizations, Embassies and Foreign NGOs 
14. FCY Accounts for Resident and Non-Resident Ethiopians, including 
for Non-Resident Foreign Nationals of Ethiopian Origin  
15. Retention Accounts for exporters of goods and services 
PART SIX: CAPITAL ACCOUNT 
39 
16. Capital repatriation 
17. External loans and suppliers’ credits 
18. External loans in-kind 
19. Special allowance for Offshore Accounts 
20. Foreign portfolio flows 
 
 
 
3 
PART SEVEN: MISCELLANEOUS ITEMS 
53 
21. Special allowance for Industrial Parks and Special Economic Zones 
22. Cash Limits   
23. Reporting Requirements  
24. Penalties and Inspection  
25. Other miscellaneous 
ANNEXES 
63 
1. Annex One: Export-Related Requirements 
2. Annex Two: Import Related Requirements 
3. Annex Three: Service Related Requirements 
4. Annex Four: Bank-Affiliated Foreign Exchange Bureau Operations 
5. Annex Five: Independent Foreign Exchange Bureau Operations 
6. Annex Six: Dry Port Import and Export Procedures 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
FOREIGN EXCHANGE DIRECTIVE NO. FXD/01/2024 
 
WHEREAS, a well-functioning foreign exchange market with clearly specified rules, 
roles, and responsibilities is critical to promote trade, financial stability, and economic 
growth; 
 
WHEREAS, a more open and competitive foreign exchange market can attract 
substantial foreign exchange inflows, ensure efficient resource allocation, and foster 
greater transparency in foreign exchange transaction activity; and 
 
WHEREAS, it has become necessary to revise and consolidate various Directives 
related to the regulation and operation of Ethiopia’s foreign exchange markets;  
 
NOW, THEREFORE; in accordance with Article 18(6), Article 20, Article 21(5) and 
Article 27(2) of the National Bank of Ethiopia Establishment (as Amended) Proclamation 
No. 591/2008, the National Bank of Ethiopia has issued this Directive as follow: 
 
PART ONE: GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
 
1. SHORT TITLE 
 
This Directive may be cited as “The Foreign Exchange Directive No. FXD/01/2024”. 
 
2. DEFINITIONS 
 
For the purpose of this Directive, unless the context requires otherwise: 
2.1. 
“A person residing in Ethiopia” refers to an Ethiopian National Residing in 
Ethiopia or a foreigner registered with a permanent or temporary residence 
permit to be an Ethiopian resident by the relevant government authority;  
2.2. 
“Acquiring bank/acquirer” means a bank or a member bank of 
international payment card network that enters into agreements with local 
merchants to accept card initiated payments for goods and services; or offers 
cash advance and disbursement services to cardholders via automated teller 
machines (ATMs), Point of Sale terminals (POS), or branches; 
2.3. 
“Agriculture machines/inputs importers” means importers engaged in 
importing of agricultural machineries such as tractors, harvesting machineries, 
combiners, irrigation pumps/water pumps and their spare parts, and inputs 
such as fertilizer, seed, pesticide and chemicals, animal feeds, and animal 
hybrids; 
 
 
 
5 
2.4. 
“Airway Bill” means a document issued by an airline or its agent evidencing 
the receipt of cargo for conveyance by air to a specific destination and 
bearing a title document to the goods airlifted; 
2.5. 
“All-in-cost” means rate of interest, other fees and expenses in foreign 
currency excluding commitment fee and pre-payment fee; 
2.6. 
"Authorized Bank" means any bank established in accordance with the law 
and authorized by the National Bank of Ethiopia  to undertake banking 
business and foreign exchange transactions;  
2.7. 
“Authorized foreign exchange dealers” means a business entity in whatever 
legal form authorized to engage in selected segments of the foreign exchange 
market with NBE permission; 
2.8. 
“Bank” means a company licensed by the National Bank to undertake 
banking business, or a bank owned by the Government; 
2.9. 
“Bank Identifier Code (BIC)” means a unique address which, in a 
telecommunication message, identifies the bank or financial institution; 
2.10. “Board” means board of directors of an Authorized bank;  
2.11. “Capital Account transactions” means inflows and outflows of capital that 
directly affect a resident’s foreign assets and/or liabilities position; 
2.12.  “Capital Goods” means any equipment or machine that may be used to 
produce products or to provide services and includes accessories; 
2.13. “Cash Against Document (CAD)” means mode of payment for goods in 
which a bank transfer title document to the buyer upon payment in cash; 
2.14. “CIP” stands for “Carriage and Insurance Paid to (…named place of 
destination).” It means that the seller must pay the cost and freight necessary 
to ship the goods to the named place of destination and has also to procure 
cargo insurance against the buyer’s risk of loss or damage to goods during 
the carriage. This term can be used for all modes of transport; 
2.15. “Convertibility Guarantee”: This is a guarantee providing assurance that 
local currency funds can be converted into foreign currency funds at the 
prevailing exchange rate; 
2.16. “Current account transactions” means transactions involving visible trade 
(exports and imports of goods), invisibles trade (export and imports of 
services), transfers (either private or public) and factor income related flows 
(from labor or capital); 
2.17. "Counterfeits" means a note printed illegally and which does not bear all the 
original characteristics and security features of legal tender issued by 
countries; 
2.18. “Customs Declaration" means a valid document issued by the Ethiopian 
Customs Commission; 
 
 
 
6 
2.19. “CPT” stands for “Carriage Paid to (…named place of destination)” means 
that the seller must pay the cost and freight necessary to ship the goods to 
the named place of destination.  Risks of loss or damage to the goods pass 
from the seller to the buyer from the time the goods are delivered at the 
named place of shipment or custody of the carrier.  The seller has to contract  
at his own expense, for carriage of the goods from the named place of 
shipment.  This term can be used for all modes of transport; 
2.20. “Debt Service Reserve Account” means a reserve account specifically set 
aside to make debt payments in the event of a disruption of cash flows to the 
extent that debt cannot be serviced; 
2.21. "Delinquent list" is a list containing names of exporters and importers who 
have not settled their foreign exchange commitments with National Bank of 
Ethiopia; 
2.22. “Delivery Point” means the final destination at which the goods purchase 
are to be delivered; 
2.23. “Deposits” means foreign currency deposits received by the opening bank 
and it may include cash certificate, cheque or other deposits of similar nature; 
2.24. “Domestic Investor” has the same meaning as provided for under the 
Investment Proclamation No 1180/2020 and means an Ethiopian national or 
a foreign national treated as a domestic investor and includes the 
government, public enterprises as well as cooperative societies established 
as per the relevant law; 
2.25. “Domestic Manufacturer” means sectors that consist of Ethiopian investors 
who produce goods for domestic market for consumption and/or as inputs 
for manufacturing, agriculture, and other economic activities; 
2.26. “E-commerce” has the same meaning as provided for under the Electronic 
Transaction Proclamation No 1205/2020 and means the exchange of goods 
and services, including the associated payments for such goods and services, 
undertaken via online and web-based market platforms; 
2.27. “Ethiopian Customs Commission” means the Ethiopian Customs 
Commission or a government organ for the time being responsible for matters 
related to Customs; 
2.28. "Exporter” means a person having a valid foreign trade license from the 
appropriate government body to engage in the export of goods or services 
abroad and in the associated generation of foreign currency; 
2.29. “External loan” means a loan acquired from an eligible foreign lender and 
approved and registered by the National Bank of Ethiopia; 
2.30. “External loan in kind” means acquisition of capital goods from an eligible 
foreign lender in the form of sale with deferred payments, lease agreement, 
 
 
 
7 
or any other legal arrangement that may be approved by the National Bank 
of Ethiopia; 
2.31. “EXW” stands for “Ex Works (…named place)” and means that the seller fulfills 
his obligation to deliver when he has made the goods available at his premises 
(i.e. works, factory, warehouse etc.).  The buyer is responsible for clearing the 
goods for export and bears all the costs and risks involved in taking the goods 
from the seller’s premises to the destination; 
2.32. “Final Invoice” means an invoice that indicates the type of commodity, unit 
price total value, shipment terms and payment terms generally indicating the 
sales of the items to a named buyer specified in the invoice for the given 
amount certified to be true and correct; 
2.33. “FOB” stands for “Free on Board (named port of shipment)” it means that the 
seller fulfils his obligation to deliver when the goods have passed over the 
ship’s rail at the named port of shipment.  This means that, from this point 
onwards, all the costs and risks of loss or damage to the goods are borne by 
the buyer.  This  term can only be used for sea or inland waterway transport; 
2.34. “Foreign capital” means paid up capital obtained from foreign sources, and 
includes the re-invested profits and dividends of a foreign investor and 
registered by pertinent government body; 
2.35. "Foreign currency" means any currency other than Ethiopian legal tender 
which is legal tender in any country outside Ethiopia and which the National 
Bank of Ethiopia has declared to be acceptable for payment in Ethiopia; 
2.36. "Foreign Currency Cash Notes" means currencies, which are acceptable by 
banks and authorized foreign exchange dealers as listed by the National Bank 
of Ethiopia from time to time; 
2.37. "Foreign Exchange" means any foreign currency notes, cheques, bills of 
exchange, promissory notes, drafts, securities, and other negotiable 
instruments, expressed in foreign currency as well as bank balances in 
account held in foreign currency or assets in the form of foreign account 
crediting or set-off arrangements, expressed or payable in foreign currencies 
provided they are acceptable by the National Bank;  
2.38. “Foreign exchange market” means a market where spot foreign exchange 
transactions are conducted at either the retail level (between bank and client 
or between forex bureau and client) or wholesale level (among banks) ; 
2.39. “Forex Bureau” means a window of an authorized bank where the purchase 
and sale of foreign currency cash notes from and to the public is conducted, 
or an independent (non-bank) company authorized by NBE to conduct 
specific foreign exchange transactions similar to that of a banks’ forex bureau; 
 
 
 
8 
2.40. "Forex Retention Accounts", also expressed as “Retention Accounts,” 
means foreign currency accounts maintained by eligible exporters of goods 
and services in accordance with the provisions of this Directive; 
2.41. “Foreign Investor” has the same meaning as provided for under the 
Investment Proclamation No 1180/2020 and means a foreigner or an 
enterprise wholly owned by foreign nationals, having invested foreign capital 
in Ethiopia or a foreigner or an Ethiopian incorporated enterprise owned by 
foreign nationals jointly investing with domestic investor, and includes an 
Ethiopian permanently residing abroad and preferring treatment as a foreign 
investor; 
2.42. “Foreign service payments” shall have the same definition as that used in 
IMF balance of payments conventions, and covers foreign payments for 
travel, transportation, education, medical treatment, government services, 
and business services; 
2.43. “Franco-valuta imports" means the importation of goods for which foreign 
exchange from the domestic banking system is not payable; 
2.44. “Guarantee” means any signed undertaking, however named or described, 
providing for payment on presentation of a complying demand; 
2.45. “Harmonized System of Commodity Description and coding system or 
(HS code)” means an internationally standardized system of names and 
numbers for classifying traded product issued by Ethiopian Customs 
Commission; 
2.46. "Importer" means a legal entity or a physical person having a valid trade 
license for foreign trade, investment or industry from appropriate government 
body to engage in the importation of goods and services from abroad; 
2.47. “Import Documents” means original documents of airway bill, final invoices 
and other relevant certificates which have been forwarded through a 
negotiating bank confirming the handling of the documents in compliance 
with a letter of credit term specified by the issuing bank or documents sent 
by remitting bank with collection instructions; 
2.48. “Indicative Daily Exchange Rate” means the exchange rate computed by 
the NBE at the end of every business day on the basis of the weighted average 
of exchanges utilized by banks that day in their foreign exchange transactions;  
2.49. "Industrial Park" means an area with distinct boundary designated by the 
appropriate organ to develop comprehensive, integrated, multiple or selected 
functions of industries, and includes special economic zones, technology 
parks, export processing zones, agro-processing zone, free trade zones and 
the like designated by the Investment Board or other pertinent authority; 
 
 
 
9 
2.50. “Inland Port” means a Dry Port Place or customs warehouse named to serve 
as an arrival or dispatch center for import and export cargos as may be 
designated by the Dry Port Service Enterprise or pertinent authority; 
2.51. “Inland Transport” means the transport of goods from the seaport areas to 
the named place at the Inland Port and/or the vice-versa.  In the case of 
export where the movement of goods is from an inland port or customs 
boundary to the seaport where the goods are to be shipped; 
2.52. Interbank foreign exchange market or equivalently the ‘wholesale foreign 
exchange market’ means a market where spot foreign exchange transactions 
are conducted among banks. 
2.53. “International Remittance Service Provider (IRSP)” means a licensed 
business organization that provides money-transferring services in 
association with Representatives; 
2.54. “Issuing bank or Issuer” means a bank and/or a member bank of 
international payment card network that holds contractual agreements with 
and issues cards to the cardholder; 
2.55. “Lease agreement” means hire-purchase agreement as regulated by 
pertinent lease law; 
2.56. “Local merchants or entities” means business, establishments or 
organizations authorized by the Bank to accept foreign currency for goods 
and services they sell and that enter into contract with acquirer banks to 
originate transactions and accept cards for payment; 
2.57. “Multi-modal Transport Contract” means a contact whereby a multi-modal 
transport operator undertakes in writing and against payment of freight to 
perform, or to procure the performance of, international multi-modal 
transport activities; 
2.58. “Multi-modal Transport documents” means the document evidencing a 
multi-modal transport contract and establishing that the multi-modal 
transport operators have taken the goods in charge and have undertaken the 
obligation to deliver it in conformity with the clauses of the contract; 
2.59. “Multi-modal Transport Operator” shall have the same meaning as 
provided in the Multi-modal Transport of Goods Proclamation No 548/2007 
and means the Ethiopian Shipping and Logistics Service Enterprise (ESLSE) 
or any other authorized entity able to conclude a multi modal transport 
contract and act as a principal not as an agent on behalf of the consignor or 
of the carriers participating in the multi-modal transport operations and who 
assumes the responsibility for the performance of the contract; 
2.60. “National Bank” means the National Bank of Ethiopia (NBE);  
 
 
 
 
10 
2.61. “Non-resident Ethiopians” means: 
a) All Ethiopian nationals who have already been living and working abroad 
for more than one year  
b) Business entities owned by non-resident Ethiopians and located outside 
the Ethiopian territory for more than one year 
c) Ethiopian nationals in due process of leaving abroad for work for more 
than one year and who can produce authenticated documents to this 
effect. 
2.62. “Non-resident Foreign Nationals of Ethiopian Origin” means: (1) A non-
resident and holder of a valid identification card, obtained pursuant to 
Proclamation No. 270/2002 or amendment thereto, attesting that he/she is 
a foreign national of Ethiopian Origin; (2) A business entity owned by non-
resident foreign nationals of Ethiopian origin and located outside the 
Ethiopian territory. 
2.63. “Not-for-profit establishments” means entities that are not established for 
profit purposes and includes, for example, local NGOs, religious 
establishments, public and government institutions; 
2.64. “Other foreign currency” means foreign currency other than those listed as 
acceptable foreign currency by NBE; 
2.65. “Payment Card Network” means a network that works with banks that issue 
cards (card issuers) and/or signs up with local merchants to accept cards for 
payment of goods and services (acquirers); 
2.66. “Pay point” means a location such as bank branch, post office, where 
remittance services are provided; 
2.67.  “Person" means any natural or juridical person; 
2.68. “Portfolio flows” means cross-border transactions involving debt or equity 
securities, other than those included in foreign direct investment or a central 
bank’s reserve assets;  
2.69. “Proforma invoice” means a document issued by a manufacturer or supplier 
which shows the price of goods; 
2.70. “Public Private Partnerships” or “PPP” has the meaning assigned to it 
under the Public Private Partnership Proclamation No. 1076/2018 or the 
amendment thereto; 
2.71. “Purchase Order” means a document that a seller issues to a vendor to place 
an order for products and that outlines all of the details of the sale, including 
quantity of product, sales price, delivery date, terms, and requirements for the 
order to be fulfilled; 
2.72. “Remittance Service” means a service that enables customers to send 
and/or receive fund transfers; 
 
 
 
11 
2.73. “Residents of Ethiopia” means Ethiopian Nationals or Resident Foreigners 
living and/or working in Ethiopia; 
2.74. “Retail foreign exchange market” refers to the market where spot foreign 
exchange transactions are conducted between banks and their clients and 
also between foreign exchange bureaus (either bank-based or independent) 
and their clients; 
2.75. “RORO Items” means cargo or goods comprising of vehicles or the like; 
2.76. “Representative”, in the context of remittance inflows, means a bank or the 
Ethiopian Postal Service or any other institution to be determined by the 
National Bank of Ethiopia; 
2.77. “Sales Point” means the place or site where goods are purchased. 
2.78. “Same legal entity” means the legal entity that generated the incoming 
foreign exchange inflow; 
2.79. “Sea Port” means areas where there are facilities for berthing or anchoring 
ships and where there is equipment for the transfer of goods from ship to 
shore or from shore to ship or ship to ship and which is a maritime inter-modal 
interface as may be designated by the pertinent government authority; 
2.80. “Special Economic Zone” shall have the same meaning as provided for in 
the Special Economic Zone Proclamation No 1322/2024; 
2.81. “Start-Up 
Companies” 
means 
those 
companies 
whose 
specific 
characteristics and eligibility criteria are as designated by the pertinent 
national authorities; 
2.82. “Strategic Foreign Direct Investment Projects” means PPP projects in 
power generation and infrastructure, large Mining Sector Projects with 
substantial export- earning potential, or other Foreign Direct Investment 
Projects as designated by the NBE’s Executive Management; 
2.83. “Supplier’s Credit” means a source of financing provided by an foreign 
supplier with a future repayment date; 
2.84. "Supplier’s Invoice" means an invoice issued by the foreign supplier of 
goods; 
2.85. “Territory of Ethiopia” refers to the territory of the Federal Democratic 
Republic of Ethiopia; 
2.86. "Trading Margin" means the difference between the face value of the notes 
delivered and the discounted value offered by the overseas buyer of the cash 
notes and agreed by the National Bank of Ethiopia; 
2.87. "Transit and Forwarding Agents" means a company which has a valid 
license to engage in the business of transit and forwarding of goods in 
Ethiopia; 
 
 
 
12 
2.88. “Transit passenger” means passengers who stay for 24 hours or less in 
Ethiopia and continues his or her flight to the next destination on a same or 
different aircraft or airline; 
2.89. “Travel Document” means any passport or other travel document, issued by 
the relevant government organ or by a foreign state recognized by the 
Government of Ethiopia or international or regional organization, bearing the 
identity and nationality of the holder; 
2.90. "Truck voyage Permit" means a permit given for the voyage of the truck by 
the relevant government organ; 
2.91. "Truck Way Bill" means a valid document issued by truck owners of a 
neighboring country as prescribed by the Ethiopian Road Transport Authority; 
2.92. “Usance Letter of credit” means a deferred payment letter of credit payable 
at a determined future date after presentation of conforming documents; 
2.93. “Weighted average exchange rate” means the effective exchange rate for 
a given set of transactions whereby the exchange rate for each transaction is 
weighted by the share of that transaction in the total volume of transactions; 
2.94. “Wholesale foreign exchange market”, or equivalently the ‘inter-bank 
foreign exchange market’ means a market where spot foreign exchange 
transactions are conducted among banks; 
2.95. Any expression in the masculine gender includes the feminine. 
 
 
3. SCOPE OF APPLICATION 
 
3.1. 
This Directive shall apply to all transactions related to foreign exchange and 
covers:  
3.1.1. the purchase, sale, transfer, borrowing, lending, assignment, 
exchange, receipt, payment or crediting of foreign exchange; and 
3.1.2. the conclusion of any contract, agreement, arrangement or 
understanding, as a result of which any foreign exchange is purchased, 
sold, transferred, borrowed, lent, assigned, exchanged, received, paid 
or credited within or outside Ethiopia. 
 
3.2. This Directive authorizes all foreign exchange purchases and cross-border 
payments for current account transactions unless explicitly stated otherwise. 
 
3.3. This Directive restricts all capital account transactions unless explicitly 
exempted otherwise. 
 
 
 
 
 
13 
PART TWO : FOREIGN EXCHANGE MARKET PARTICIPANTS AND 
OPERATIONS 
 
4. ROLE OF BANKS AND AUTHORIZED FOREIGN EXCHANGE DEALERS 
 
4.1. Banks 
 
Banks shall play a central role in the foreign exchange market and: 
 
4.1.1 may open and operate correspondent bank accounts abroad after 
obtaining authorization from National Bank. 
4.1.2 may hold foreign exchange cash and other instruments subject to the 
limits laid out in this Directive; 
4.1.3 shall provide permits for the exports and imports of goods and services 
in a manner consistent with this Directive; 
4.1.4 may enter into forward exchange transactions only in cases approved 
by the National Bank. 
4.1.5 may accept, purchase and hold in their accounts with correspondent 
banks abroad only foreign exchange that are easily convertible unless 
specifically authorized or directed by the National Bank. 
4.1.6 shall export or transmit negotiable or non-negotiable instruments to 
credit in their correspondent bank account abroad. 
4.1.7 may not acquire shares, stocks and bonds denominated in foreign 
exchange unless authorized by the National Bank.  
4.1.8 may not enter into a loan or a guarantee agreement with banks or 
other lenders abroad unless authorized by the National Bank. 
4.1.9 shall prepare an Internal Foreign Exchange Policy Manual that clearly 
specifies and governs the Bank’s foreign exchange operational 
procedures and that shall be subject to review by the Bank’s Internal 
Audit functions.  
 
4.2. Authorized Foreign Exchange Dealers 
 
4.2.1 The NBE may allow non-bank companies, including independent 
foreign exchange bureaus, to participate in selected segments of the 
foreign exchange market such as the purchase and sale of foreign 
currency notes or other designated activities.   
4.2.2 The rules governing the operations of Independent Foreign Exchange 
Bureaus, including their roles, responsibilities and requirements are as 
provided in Annex Five of this Directive.  
 
 
 
14 
 
4.3. Inter-bank Foreign Exchange Market  
 
4.3.1 An inter-bank foreign exchange market (or ‘wholesale foreign 
exchange market’) shall serve as the primary market for the sale and 
purchase of foreign exchange among banks. 
4.3.2 Buying and selling of foreign currency in the inter-bank foreign 
exchange market is allowed only by and among parties that are 
authorized by the NBE. 
4.3.3 The inter-bank foreign exchange market shall be governed by a 
“Foreign Exchange Market Operation Guideline” as well as by a 
“Foreign Exchange Market Code of Conduct” to be adhered by all 
banks and authorized foreign exchange dealers. 
 
5. FOREIGN EXCHANGE RATE DETERMINATION: 
 
The determination of the exchange rate applicable to foreign exchange 
transactions shall be governed by the following principles: 
 
5.1. 
Banks and authorized foreign exchange dealers are allowed to buy and sell 
foreign currencies from/to their clients and among themselves at freely 
negotiated rates.  
5.2. Banks shall report to the NBE the exchange rate used in their daily foreign 
exchange transactions by the end of the day, in a format specified in the 
“Foreign Exchange Market Operations Guideline.” 
5.3. The NBE shall compile the exchange rates used by all banks and authorized 
foreign exchange dealers in their daily transactions and publicly 
communicate an Indicative Daily Exchange Rate, calculated on the basis of 
these submissions, to the market by the start of the following business day. 
This Indicative Daily Exchange Rate shall constitute the accounting exchange 
rate for that business day.  
5.4. The Indicative Daily Exchange Rate shall serve as a reference price, but not 
a mandatory transaction price, for banks and authorized foreign exchange 
dealers in their foreign exchange transactions at the start of the business day. 
 
6. FOREIGN EXCHANGE REPATRIATION AND RETENTION: 
 
6.1 No person may export or enter into any commitment to export goods without 
the prior approval of an Authorized Bank and unless there are payment 
instruments which secure the payment to be expected or the exporter 
 
 
 
15 
undertakes to repatriate the resultant sales proceeds in foreign exchange to 
an authorized bank either before the actual export, at the time of export, or 
within a period of not later than three months or within such other period 
that the National Bank may from time to time prescribe for any class of 
exports or for any particular export. 
6.2 After fulfilling the repatriation requirement set out in sub-article 6.1, exporters 
of goods and services shall immediately convert into Birr, at a freely 
negotiated rate, 50 percent (50%) of their export proceeds to the Bank used 
in processing their foreign exchange transaction, while keeping the 
remaining 50 percent (50%) in their Foreign Exchange Retention Account. 
6.3 Foreign exchange earners as specified in sub-article 6.2 above shall be 
entitled to utilize—only for own use by the same legal entity—the foreign 
exchange balance in their Foreign Exchange Retention Account. Such 
utilization shall be allowed for all current account payments of the same legal 
entity, including payments for imports of goods, services, and (if applicable) 
dividends and external debt service repayments.   
6.4 As a temporary measure to support the development of an interbank foreign 
exchange market, foreign exchange earnings in a Retention Account shall 
be sold to the transacting bank used for that fx inflow after a period of no 
more than 30 calendar days. Funds in an exporter’s Retention Account may 
also be converted into Birr at any time prior to the 30-day limit, if the account 
holder so wishes.  
6.5 Exporters selling any unutilized foreign exchange earnings in their Retention 
Account shall do so at a freely negotiated exchange rate.  
6.6 The percent share of foreign exchange proceeds to be converted 
immediately, as specified in sub-article 6.2, may be modified from time to 
time by the NBE.  
6.7 The period within which foreign exchange earnings in a Retention Account 
must be used may also be modified from time to time by the NBE. 
6.8 The conversion requirement noted in sub-article 6.2 shall not apply to 
foreign exchange inflows related to foreign direct investment (FDI), foreign 
grants, all FCY accounts, external loans, and portfolio inflows. 
 
 
 
 
 
16 
PART THREE : EXPORTS, IMPORTS, AND SERVICES 
 
7. EXPORT OF GOODS 
 
7.1 General 
 
7.1.1 Authorized Banks are mandated to provide export permits for the 
export of goods of any value, except Gold, against submission of the 
required documents by the exporter. 
7.1.2 National Bank shall allow exports of Gold for any value against 
submission of the required documents by the exporter. 
7.1.3 Banks bear the responsibility for ensuring that export proceed from all 
approved exports are repatriated into Ethiopia.  
7.1.4 The export of goods shall be subject to a number of foreign exchange 
related requirements regarding the conduct of banks and exporters. 
The main elements of these requirements are presented in sub-article 
7.2 below, while their full details are provided in Annex One, which 
forms an integral part of the FX Directive. 
7.1.5 The acceptable Mode of Payments for export of goods shall include: 
(1) Letters of Credits at sight and on acceptance; (2) Cash Against 
Documents at sight and on acceptance; (3) Advance payments (via 
bank transfers, debit/credit cards, or cash notes declared at customs); 
(4) consignment sales; and (5) Open Accounts in the case of e-
commerce and other export transactions explicitly granted permission 
by the NBE. The terms and conditions as well as any applicable 
restrictions for the use of each of these modes of payments is provided 
in Annex One. 
7.1.6 The export applications shall be valid for 30 calendar days from the 
date of issue, unless otherwise specified.  
7.1.7 The operations of E-Commerce exports and exports by Start-Up 
Companies, as defined in the relevant laws, shall be consistent with 
the special guidance to be prepared and published by NBE.  
 
 
 
 
 
17 
7.2 Export-Related Requirements: 
The requirements applicable for exports are specified in Annex One and 
cover the following key areas: 
 
1. Applicable Mode of Payment:  
2. Documentation Requirements 
3. Applicable Terms of Payment 
4. Special Treatment for Flower Exports 
5. Special Treatment for Small Export items 
6. Special Treatment for Temporary Exports 
7. Granting of Provisional Export Permits 
8. Change of Basis of export shipments 
9. Cancellation of export applications 
10. Settlement of commitments 
11. Submission of returns 
 
8. IMPORT OF GOODS 
 
8.1 General:  
 
8.1.1 Authorized Banks are mandated to provide import permits for the 
import of goods of any value, against submission of the required 
documents by the importer.  
8.1.2 Banks bear responsibility for ensuring that payments for imports are 
effected fully in line with commitments under the applicable mode of 
payments.  
8.1.3 Any imports of goods that do not utilize foreign exchange resources 
from the banking system (widely known as franco-valuta imports and 
not requiring the use of L/C, CAD, Advance payment or other payment 
modalities) shall be permitted to enter the country subject to all the 
customary customs, tax, health, or other pertinent regulatory 
standards set by the relevant authorities.  
8.1.4 The importation of goods shall be subject to a number of foreign 
exchange related requirements regarding the conduct of banks and 
importers. The main elements of these requirements are presented in 
sub-article 8.2 below, while their full details are provided in Annex 
Two, which forms an integral part of the FX Directive. 
 
 
 
 
18 
8.2 Import-Related Requirements:  
 
The requirements applicable for imports are specified in Annex Two and 
cover the following key areas: 
 
1. Registration of Import application and approval 
2. Applicable mode of payment for imports 
3. Document Requirement and Payment Term Arrangement 
4. Imports Destined to Inland Dry Port 
5. Imports of Used Goods 
6. Imports through Suppliers Credits 
7. Imports of Diplomatic Bodies, International Organizations, and NGOs 
8. Commodity Classification of Imports 
9. Actions required before and after receipt of import documents  
10. Validity of import application. 
11. Amendment of import applications 
12. Cancellation of imports 
13. Settlement of import-related commitments 
14. Submission of import-related returns 
 
9. SERVICE PAYMENT AND RECEIPTS 
 
9.1 General 
 
9.1.1 Banks are authorized to effect all foreign service payments for their 
clients subject to the presentation of bona fide invoices and other 
supporting documents or requirements as laid out in this Directive.  
9.1.2 The main elements of these requirements are presented in sub-article 
9.2 below, while their full details are provided in Annex Three, which 
is an integral part of this FX Directive.  
 
 
 
 
 
19 
9.2 Service Related Requirements: 
 
The requirements applicable for service payments are specified in Annex 
Three and cover the following key areas: 
 
1. Import Transit payments 
2. Export Transit payments 
3. Import Freight payments 
4. Export Freight payments 
5. Import-related other charges  
6. Export-related other charges 
7. Reinsurance premium 
8. Foreigners’ Salary Remittances 
9. Medical Expenses 
10. Educational Expenses 
11. Other Service Payments 
12. Documents required for service payments 
13. Validity of service payment permits 
14. Freight expenses for foreign nationals 
15. Treatment of Foreign Airlines transactions 
 
 
 
 
 
20 
PART FOUR : FOREX BUREAU OPERATIONS, REMITTANCES, AND 
PAYMENT INSTRUMENTS 
 
10. 
FOREX BUREAU OPERATIONS 
 
10.1 General 
 
10.1.1 Foreign exchange bureau shall operate only following authorization 
by the National Bank. 
10.1.2 Foreign exchange bureaus may operate either as a specialized 
window of banks or as independent (non-bank) foreign exchange 
bureau. 
10.1.3 Bank-based foreign exchange bureaus shall undertake foreign 
exchange transactions subject to a number of requirements that 
cover the areas presented in sub-article 10.2 below and that are 
further detailed in Annex Four, which forms an integral part of the 
FX Directive. 
10.1.4 Independent (non-bank) foreign exchange bureaus shall undertake 
foreign exchange transactions subject to a number of requirements 
that cover the areas presented in sub-article 10.2 below and that 
are further detailed in Annex Five, which forms an integral part of 
the FX Directive. 
 
10.2 Forex Bureau Related Requirements: 
 
1. 
Conditions for issuance of license 
2. Security requirements 
3. Processing requirements 
4. Nomenclature 
5. Obligations of staff 
6. FX Bureau Transactions 
7. 
Determination of exchange rates 
8. Displaying Exchange Rates and Notices 
9. Authority to sell foreign exchange 
 
 
 
 
 
 
21 
11. INTERNATIONAL REMITTANCES 
 
11.1 
Eligibility to Provide International Remittance Services 
 
11.1.1 
Banks and other Authorized Remittance Service Representatives 
are eligible to provide remittance service in association with 
International Remittance Service Providers. 
11.1.2 Authorized Remittance Service Representatives (other than 
banks) may include companies whose payment systems, 
platforms, gateways, or physical branch network can be used for 
effecting remittance payments to beneficiaries. Such entities 
may include the Ethiopian Postal Service, telecom companies, 
Payment System Operators, Payment Instrument Issuers, or 
other similar entities designated and approved by the NBE.  
11.1.3 Authorized Remittance Service Representatives are eligible to 
provide remittance service by making use of the correspondent 
account of one or more partner Banks. To this effect, the 
Authorized Remittance Service Representative shall furnish 
National Bank with a draft remittance service contract with each 
of its partner banks for approval. 
 
11.2 Obligations of Representative 
 
In addition to other obligations provided under this Directive, a 
Representative shall have the following obligations in providing 
international remittance service. 
 
11.2.1 A Representative may provide its service from one or more 
locations and all the locations shall be notified beforehand to the 
National Bank. 
11.2.2 A Representative shall open work units to facilitate the service 
and provide payment within 24 hours to the beneficiary.  
11.2.3 A Representative shall undertake customer identification and 
due diligence as defined under Prevention and Suppression of 
Money Laundering and the Countering Financing of Terrorism 
laws. 
11.2.4 Any Representative shall be fully liable for improperly disbursed 
funds by its Sub-Representatives such as its branches, sub-
branches, or other designated agents acting on behalf of the 
representative. 
 
 
 
22 
11.2.5 Any Representative shall be responsible to ensure the terms and 
conditions of remittance service agreements are in conformity 
with pertinent Laws of The Federal Democratic Republic of 
Ethiopia. 
11.2.6 A Representative shall get prior approval from National Bank 
before entering into Representative agreement with IRSP. 
 
11.3 Remittance Service Representation Agreement  
 
11.3.1 Representatives shall make remittance service contract 
agreement only with licensed International Remittance Service 
Providers. 
11.3.2 A Representative shall gather sufficient information about the 
Remittance Service Providers to understand fully the nature of 
their business and to determine from publicly available 
information, the reputation of IRSP and the quality of 
supervision, including whether it has been subject to a money 
laundering or terrorist financing investigation or regulatory 
action. 
11.3.3 Contractual agreement between Representative and Remittance 
Service Provider shall not be for more than four years provided 
that a Representative is responsible in following-up the validity 
of Remittance Service Provider’s license within the contract 
period.  
11.3.4 Any intended alteration in provisions of remittance contract, 
within a validity period, should be notified to the National Bank 
for approval at least ten days before the alteration or amendment 
takes place.   
11.3.5 Representative and IRSP shall incorporate in their agreement 
appropriate procedure for the prevention of money laundering 
and terrorist financing   activities. 
11.3.6 The Remittance Service Agreement may not be renewed without 
prior consent of National Bank.  
 
11.4 Application  
 
To provide remittance service, a Representative shall submit the following 
documents to National Bank. 
 
11.4.1 Application letter to provide International Remittance Service;  
 
 
 
23 
11.4.2 Copy of Remittance Service Provider’s valid business license and 
required documents which are authenticated by Ethiopian 
Embassies abroad or other pertinent organizations; 
11.4.3 Copy of draft Remittance service agreement which governs the 
business relation between the representative and the Remittance 
Service Provider; 
11.4.4 The address of each Pay Point in Ethiopia;   
11.4.5 A document showing the intention to prevent money laundering 
activities in accordance with the Prevention and Suppression of 
Money Laundering and the Financing of Terrorism Law; and  
11.4.6 For non-banks, agreement with a partner bank whose 
correspondent bank is being utilized to process the payments.   
11.4.7 For the purpose of sub-article 11.6.2 of this article, valid evidence 
which shows the IRSP is operating remittance services in 50(fifty) 
or more countries.  
 
11.5 Prohibition 
 
11.5.1 Representative may not provide remittance service without 
having a valid remittance service contract approved by National 
Bank. 
11.5.2 An International Remittance Service Providers is not allowed to 
assign its employee as a liaison officer or interpreter at the 
premises of a representative or at a pay point.  
11.5.3 Remittance Service Agreement may not be subject to exclusivity 
conditions.      
 
11.6 Settlement of Account 
 
11.6.1 A Representative shall effect payment to the beneficiary when 
the IRSP credited sufficient amount of foreign currency in 
advance to its correspondent account.  
11.6.2 Notwithstanding, sub-article 11.6.1 of this article, settlement  
between a Representative and International Remittance service 
provider may be made within 24 hours when the latter submit a  
valid  evidence confirming the operation of remittance services 
in  50 (fifty)  or more countries.  
11.6.3 Under sub-article 11.6.2 of this article, if settlement is not effected 
within 24 hours without good cause, a Representative stop next 
 
 
 
24 
day payment and report the matter with explanation to National 
Bank. 
11.6.4 The beneficiary to be paid in Birr at the prevailing exchange rate, 
or credited in foreign exchange in cases where the beneficiary 
maintains a foreign currency account. 
11.6.5 A Representative shall charge zero or minimum fee on 
remittance transfer services and shall disclose same including 
any change thereof to National Bank. The fee in any case cannot 
exceed 1% of the transferred money. 
 
11.7 Transparency  
 
Remittance services Providers should provide a transparent service to their 
customers.  To this end, Representative shall clearly disclose and/or post: 
 
11.7.1 The terms and all applicable fees and charges. 
11.7.2 A Representative Identifier Code (BICs) and International 
Representative Account Numbers (IBANs) in their correspondent 
banks, only for a bank. 
 
11.8 Promotion of Remittance Service  
 
Representative shall advertise its remittance services, BICs and IBANs 
through Brochures, Websites and Ethiopian embassies, consulates abroad 
and through other similar means.  
 
11.9 Keeping Records 
 
Representative shall keep complete records and registers of all remittance 
service transactions and shall produce such books to National Bank upon 
written request.  
 
12. PAYMENT INSTRUMENTS: FOREIGN CARDS, CASH NOTES, AND OTHERS  
 
12.1 General 
The provisions of this article shall apply to all Authorized Banks, local 
merchants or businesses, and foreign exchange bureaus in Ethiopia 
 
 
 
 
 
25 
12.2 Eligibility to Issue International Debit or Pre-paid Cards  
12.2.1 Any authorized bank operating in Ethiopia may secure a 
membership license or agreement from one or more international 
payment card networks specified under sub-article 12.4.1(d) of this 
directive. 
12.2.2 Authorized banks who have entered into agreements with or 
secured an issuing license from international payment card network 
are authorized to issue international debit/prepaid cards for 
travelers abroad subject to sub-article 12.3 of this directive.  
 
12.3 Conditions to be fulfilled to Issue International Debit/Prepaid Cards  
 
12.3.1 Only bank-affiliated forex bureaus are authorized to provide 
international debit/prepaid cards unless explicitly authorized by 
NBE.   
 
12.3.2 Authorized banks are required to fulfill the under listed conditions 
to issue International debit/prepaid card; 
 
a. 
Install card personalization machine or terminal, or produce 
valid 
outsourcing 
contractual 
agreement 
for 
card 
personalization; 
b. Produce membership agreement and /or license granted by 
international payment card networks; 
c. 
Establish central  payment  system for clearing; and 
d. Put in place secured telecommunication infrastructures. 
 
12.3.3 An authorized bank and its forex bureau shall have the following 
obligations in issuing, acquiring and settling international 
prepaid/debit cards.  
 
A.  Bank-affiliated Forex Bureaus 
1. Forex bureaus shall issue travel allowance in debit/prepaid 
card and cash notes herein under to travelers abroad upon 
presentation of: 
 
 
 
 
26 
a. valid passport with entry visa abroad (except for 
countries that issue visa on arrival) and air ticket; 
b. application form duly filled and signed indicating the 
amount needed in cash notes and to be loaded on 
payment cards; and 
c. duly filled and signed card holder agreement to get 
prepaid/ debit card. 
2. Forex bureaus shall check the authenticity of travel 
documents presented and shall explain to travelers or their 
delegates the use and conditions of the debit/prepaid cards 
issued to them. 
3. Forex bureaus shall provide the travel allowance in cash 
notes and the balance in debit/prepaid card by entering the 
permit number as per Annex Four. 
4. The foreign currency allowed for travel allowance shall be 
any of the convertible currencies accepted by NBE.  
5. Forex bureaus shall refund to the cardholder unused 
balance in a prepaid/debit card in Birr after checking the 
details of the transactions and account statement. 
6. Forex bureaus shall check the validity of the card while 
issuing subsequent travel allowance for the cardholder. 
 
B. Authorized Banks 
1. Authorized banks have the responsibility to expedite 
issuance of prepaid/debit card for travelers abroad after 
receiving all required documents from the traveler. 
2. Authorized banks shall notify to the travelers the fees and 
service 
payment 
required 
for 
one-time 
card 
issuance/renewal and optional issuer fees (conversion 
fees) on each transaction.  
3. Authorized banks shall make strict follow up and ensure 
that the debit/prepaid card is not over drawn under any 
circumstance. 
4. Authorized banks shall immediately block card related 
transactions upon receipt of report on missed or lost cards 
by the cardholder. 
 
12.3.4 Validity 
 
 
 
27 
The validity of debit/prepaid card shall not exceed two years from 
the date of issuance and may be renewed upon request. 
 
 
12.3.5 Acceptance of International Payment Cards 
Eligibility to Accept International Credit Cards/Debit Cards;  
 
a. Authorized banks are required to have membership and or 
license from International payment card networks to sign up 
with local merchants and provide ATM acquiring and cash 
advance services. 
b. Authorized banks which have entered into agreements with the 
international payment card networks can provide encashment 
services via branches and ATMs. 
c. Types of acceptable international cards shall include the 
following but not limited to: 
 
i) 
American Express,   
ii) 
Visa Card,  
iii) Mastercard,   
iv) Diners Club Card, 
v) 
Union Pay, 
vi) JCB, and 
vii) Discover. 
 
12.3.6 Local Merchants or Entities 
To accept international credit/debit card for payments local 
merchants or businesses shall have an agreement with authorized 
banks (which have a membership agreement or license from an 
international payment card network) to accept international cards 
as mode of payment for goods and services. 
 
12.4 Conditions for Licensing Local Merchants or Entities to Accept 
Credit/Debit Card  
 
12.4.1 The following conditions must be fulfilled by local merchants or 
entities to get license to accept international credit/debit card for 
card brands that are not acquired by authorized banks: 
 
 
 
28 
a. License from the appropriate Government Authority to 
conduct a business at a specified location and address; 
b. trained personnel capable to examine, authenticate and book 
credit card/debit card sales, lodge proper claim on the 
transactions through the international acquiring bank, and 
follow up collection of payments processed on line; and  
c. a contractual agreement concluded with international card 
acquirer or card network clearly stating payment collecting 
methods. 
12.4.2 Local merchants or entities, who have made arrangements for 
collecting payments via payments online, shall clearly indicate the 
card brand and the acquiring bank designated to collect the 
payments on their behalf and shall possess the POS terminal.  
12.4.3 Local merchants or entities shall undertake the responsibility to 
collect payments using credit card/debit card through vouchers 
or in case of payments processed online, through Authorized 
Banks in Ethiopia delegated by them. 
 
12.5 Online Credit Card/Debit Card Payments 
 
Local merchants or entities operating through online credit card/debit card 
payments for card brands shall fulfill the following: 
 
12.5.1 shall have clear settlement arrangement with authorized acquiring 
banks regarding collection of payments via payment system; and 
12.5.2 Submit to the Bank agreement documents signed with the 
authorized international acquirers to collect payments on their 
behalf, via payment system.  
 
12.6 Settlement of Credit Card/Debit Card Proceeds by Banks 
 
12.6.1 Authorized banks that take-up vouchers of credit card/debit card 
from local merchants or entities and those who are providing 
settlement services are required to dispatch the vouchers for 
collections to the credit card/debit card network or international 
acquirer, as the case may be, seeking payment redemption.  
12.6.2 The authorized banks shall institute the most expeditious means of 
settlement with credit card/debit card issuers or banks. 
12.6.3 Authorized Banks that have signed up with local merchants or 
entities to accept international cards by using their payment 
 
 
 
29 
system shall facilitate immediate receipt of funds through their 
correspondent banks (settlement bank) and settle the equivalent 
local currency amount to the beneficiary local merchant or entity. 
12.6.4 Upon receipt of payment for services delivered using vouchers or 
direct payment through the online (POS) system, banks shall credit 
the account of their customers or transfer the amount to the 
account of the local merchants or entity with any bank the 
equivalent amount in Birr at the prevailing exchange rate. National 
Banks should send information on prescribed format of such 
advice to the Bank for further follow-up and recording. 
 
12.7 Claims Returned Unpaid 
 
Claims returned unpaid shall be handled as follows: 
 
12.7.1 
In the event that claims presented by any Authorized Bank to the 
credit card/debit card issuer or banks are not honored and settled, 
the bank shall immediately inform the client the reason for non-
payment and advise same to the National Bank; and  
12.7.2 The local merchants or entities shall have the responsibility to take 
a close follow-up and make efforts to settle the payments based 
on agreements concluded and service rendered. They shall also 
report the follow up made and results obtained to the National 
Bank. 
 
12.8 Acceptance of Foreign Currency Cash Notes 
 
12.8.1 The following local merchants or entities are eligible to accept 
payments in foreign cash notes: 
 
a. Hotels that serve tourists including those below three stars 
that are  identified and confirmed by the Ministry of Culture 
and Tourism; 
b. Duty free shop operators; 
c. Immigration Office; 
d. Civil Aviation Authority; 
e. Airline ticket offices and travel agents only for air ticket sales 
services; 
f. Tour operators; 
 
 
 
30 
g. Shops operating at the airport on the air side (shops 
operating passed immigration line). 
h. Telecom Service within Airport to sale SIM card and airtime 
for tourists; 
i. Fuel station placed inside the airport collecting foreign 
currency cash notes in lieu of fuel lift-up from different 
foreign airline not operating in Ethiopia; 
j. Guest houses that are registered and secured License from 
Ethiopian Tourism Commission; 
k. Private airways operating in Ethiopia and give charter service 
for tourists and  
l. Specialized hospitals and clinics that give service to 
foreigners. 
 
12.8.2 Submission of Application 
 
Local merchants or entities that intend to accept foreign currency 
cash notes shall fill the form prepared for the purpose and submit 
same to the NBE for approval. 
 
12.9 Condition for Issuance of License to Accept Foreign Cash Notes  
 
Local merchants or entities may obtain a license from the NBE to accept 
cash notes upon fulfilling the following requirements: 
 
a. should have knowledgeable personnel who can handle the 
transactions and provide the appropriate service to the 
segmented customers; 
b. should have currency validating machine or/and appropriate 
instruments to verify notes and travelers’ cheques; 
c. Local merchants or entities shall accept convertible 
currencies only in foreign currencies acceptable by NBE. 
 
12.10 Issuance of License to Local Merchants or Entities 
 
a. 
Local merchants or entities may obtain a license from the National 
Bank for accepting foreign currency cash notes, and travelers’ 
cheques and to use credit/debit card in settlement of payments 
under one permit or separately, as the case may be. 
 
 
 
31 
b. The license granted by the National Bank shall strictly be applicable 
for the permitted activities only.   
 
12.11 Obligation of Local Merchants or Entities 
 
In accepting credit/debit card, cash notes and payments local merchants 
or entities: 
 
12.11.1 shall use appropriate instruments to verify and validate the 
authenticity of the currency and payment instrument; 
12.11.2 shall identify the customer and retain copies of documents in case 
a need arises for tracing back and a recourse action is needed; 
12.11.3 shall keep the proper details of the customer like passport number, 
homeland address, telephone number etc. and require customs 
declaration form issued by Ethiopian Customs Commission on 
arrival at the time of collecting payments from their client; 
12.11.4 are required to convert all foreign currencies collected during one 
business day at forex bureaus within two working days, except for 
petty cash notes of up to USD 3,000 or its equivalent in other 
acceptable foreign currency as defined by NBE that may be held 
at any given time to facilitate transactions with their customers;  
12.11.5 are required to keep all supporting documents with copies of their 
reports in a proper file for onsite inspection. 
 
12.12 Requirement to Post the Applicable Exchange Rate 
 
12.12.1 Local merchants or entities are required to post the applicable 
exchange rate of their chosen partner bank that shall be used for 
collecting payments via foreign currency cash notes or via 
credit/debit cards.  
12.12.2 Local merchants or entities shall estimate the prices for buying 
different currencies and consider processing costs that may be 
involved should they charge separate processing fees for the 
exchange transactions. 
12.12.3 The rates fixed for different types of currencies shall be clearly 
shown and placed in a visible position on a display panel. 
12.12.4 Local merchants or entities shall only quote one way buying rate 
and must not be involved in currency trading. 
 
 
 
32 
12.12.5 Local merchants or entities authorized to accept payments using 
credit card/debit card and cash notes shall clearly post the rate at 
which they buy major currencies.  
 
12.13 Retention Rights 
 
Local merchants or entities may apply to be included in the Retention 
Accounts Scheme and shall be allowed to retain foreign exchange as 
provided for in Article 6. In this case, the Authorized Banks shall credit the 
retention account of the local merchant or entity with the proceeds from 
receipts of cash notes and transactions. 
 
 
 
 
 
33 
PART FIVE: FOREIGN CURRENCY ACCOUNTS 
 
Foreign currency accounts may be established by eligible individuals and entities upon 
the fulfillment of the requirements applicable for specific accounts. The following three 
categories of Foreign Currency Accounts are authorized by the NBE and additional 
types of accounts may be permitted from time to time.  
 
1. 
FCY Accounts for Foreign Entities, including FDI Companies, International 
Organizations, Embassies, and Foreign NGOs; 
2. FCY Accounts for Resident and Non-Resident Ethiopians, including for 
Non-Resident Foreign Nationals of Ethiopian Origin; 
3. Retention Accounts for exporters of goods and services. 
 
 
13. FOREIGN CURRENCY ACCOUNTS FOR FOREIGN ENTITIES:  FDI 
COMPANIES, INTERNATIONAL ORGANIZATIONS, EMBASSIES, and 
FOREIGN NGOs. 
 
13.1 Eligibility to open Foreign Currency Accounts for FDI Companies, 
International Organizations, Embassies, and Foreign NGOs. 
 
13.1.1 
Authorized Banks may open and maintain Non-Resident Foreign 
Currency Accounts in the name of persons, corporate bodies, 
institutions and diplomatic organizations falling within the 
following categories: 
 
a. 
FDI Companies; 
b. International Organizations; 
c. 
Foreign Embassies and consulates; 
d. Foreign Non-Government Organizations 
 
13.1.2 Foreign individual employees of the above companies are entitled 
to open Foreign Currency Accounts as per Article 14 of this 
Directive.  
 
 
13.2 General conditions: 
 
All funds credited to these Non-Resident Foreign Currency Accounts may 
be transferred without the necessity of obtaining National Bank’s Permit 
approval. 
 
 
 
34 
13.2.1 Foreign Currency Accounts can be maintained at more than one 
bank. 
13.2.2 Overdrawing of transferable accounts is prohibited. 
13.2.3 Application letter to open a Foreign Currency or Birr account in 
the name of persons under sub-article 13.1.1 shall be accompanied 
by a supporting letter issued by the appropriate organization 
certifying that the applicant is an official member of the 
organization with a passport or its equivalent.  
13.2.4 Foreign currency accounts can be opened in any tradeable 
currencies acceptable by NBE 
 
13.3 Entries to Non-Resident Foreign Currency Accounts  
 
Non-Resident Foreign currency accounts shall be credited with the 
following items 
 
a. 
Foreign exchange incoming from abroad; 
b. 
Payments from residents of Ethiopia effected under specific 
authorization of National Bank; and 
c. 
Payments 
from 
other 
Non-Resident 
foreign 
currency 
Accounts. 
 
13.4 Eligibility to Open Birr Accounts 
 
13.4.1 Foreign Entities qualified to open FCY accounts are also permitted 
to open Birr accounts at any bank of their choice.  
 
13.5 Documentation needed to open FCY Accounts for Foreign Entities: 
  
13.5.1 Foreign Companies (FDI): Application letter, foreign investment 
License, TIN Certificate, NBE approval letter and other 
requirements as requested by the opening bank.  
13.5.2 International 
Organizations: 
Application 
letter 
and 
other 
requirements as requested by the opening bank. 
13.5.3 Embassies: Application letter and other requirements as requested 
by the opening bank. 
13.5.4 Foreign NGOs: Application letter, supporting letter from pertinent 
authority, other requirements requested by other relevant laws 
and the opening bank. 
 
 
 
 
35 
13.6 Uses of the Account: 
 
Holders of FCY Accounts for Foreign Companies, International 
Organizations, Embassies and Foreign NGOs may use the account for all 
foreign payments without any restriction.  
 
13.7 Treatment of Existing Non-Resident Transferable Birr Accounts (NR-
T) and Non-Resident Non-Transferable Birr (NR-NT) Accounts: 
 
13.7.1 
NR-T Birr Accounts and NR-NT Birr Accounts shall no longer be 
offered by banks following the enactment of this Directive. 
13.7.2 Existing NR-T Birr Accounts and NR-NT Birr Accounts already in 
place as of the effective date of this Directive shall be guided by 
the previous utilization rules applicable on such accounts.  
13.7.3 Existing NR-T and NR-NT Accounts shall no longer be credited 
with new inflows following the date of this Directive and shall be 
closed upon the full usage of any balances.  
 
14. FCY ACCOUNTS FOR RESIDENT AND NON-RESIDENT ETHIOPIANS, 
INCLUDING FOREIGN NATIONALS OF ETHIOPIAN ORIGIN 
 
14.1 
Eligibility Criteria 
 
The following individuals and/or entities may open a foreign currency 
account in any Authorized Bank in Ethiopia: 
 
1. 
Residents of Ethiopia: 
a. Individuals 
b. Not-for-profit organizations are entitled to open Resident FCY 
Accounts for inflows of foreign exchange received from 
sources such as grants, awards or other similar sources.  
2. 
Non-Resident Ethiopian Individuals; and  
3. 
Persons of Ethiopian Origin, i.e. Non-Resident Foreign 
Nationals of Ethiopian Origin. 
 
14.2 Account Opening Requirements and Conditions 
 
14.2.1 The opening of accounts shall be governed by the account 
opening procedures of the respective banks, but shall include at 
minimum: 
 
 
 
36 
 
1. 
Completion of an Application forms properly filled and 
signed by the account holder; digital submissions with 
sufficient identification verification procedures shall be 
acceptable. 
2. For individuals, valid passport and/or identification cards.  
3. For businesses or other entities, formal registration 
documents establishing legal identity including Article 
and/or Memorandum of Association, or any other similar 
document by whatsoever name it may be referred, 
authenticated and registered by the pertinent authority,  
4. Minimum account required for opening an FCY account 
shall be USD 100 or its equivalent in other acceptable 
currencies as defined by the National Bank. 
5. Two or more depositors may together open a single 
account. 
 
14.2.2 CY Accounts for Resident and Non-Resident Ethiopians may be 
opened at more than one bank.  
 
14.3 
Types of Permitted Account 
 
A bank may open Foreign Currency Accounts that take the form of 
current accounts, savings accounts, or time deposit accounts. The 
terms and conditions of each of these accounts, including applicable 
interest rates, are to be based on the agreement between the 
depositor and the opening Bank.  
 
14.4 Types of Currency 
 
14.4.1 Authorized bank is required to maintain Foreign Currency 
accounts in the following types of currency: 
i. 
The US dollar 
ii. 
Pound Sterling 
iii. 
Euro 
iv. 
Other tradeable currencies acceptable by NBE 
14.4.2 Authorized Bank may accept deposits in other convertible 
currencies that include Chinese Yuan, Canadian Dollar, Saudi 
Riyal, Japanese Yen, Australian Dollar and UAE Dirham; these 
 
 
 
37 
other currencies shall be converted to the currency used for 
account opening at the spot exchange rate. 
 
14.5 Crediting the Account 
 
14.5.1 A FCY Account for Resident and Non-Resident Ethiopians may 
be credited by: 
 
1. 
Transfers from accounts abroad effected through the 
banking system; 
2. Foreign currency transferred through International 
Remittance Service Providers and retained by the 
beneficiary to be held in foreign currency terms.   
3. Transfers to a Resident of Ethiopia in foreign currency terms 
on account of salary, rental, or other income earned by the 
Resident in foreign currency; 
4. A transfer from any foreign currency account within 
Ethiopia. 
5. Foreign currency cash notes. For cash notes exceeding 
USD 10,000 (USD ten thousand) or equivalent in any other 
convertible foreign currency, the depositor shall present a 
signed and sealed foreign currency. declaration form from 
Ethiopian Custom Authority.  
6. Check deposits originated from abroad or issued in foreign 
currency terms by a local FCY Account holder. 
7. 
Receipt through international payment cards, including 
credit or debit cards. 
 
14.6  Use of the Account 
 
14.6.1 Funds in a FCY Account for Resident and Non-Resident 
Ethiopians may be used to: 
 
1. 
Make conversions into a Birr account or into Birr cash notes 
at the prevailing exchange rate. 
2. Make foreign service payments based on the presentation of 
underlying invoices; 
3. Withdraw foreign currency cash notes in line with the rules 
governing forex bureaus. 
 
 
 
38 
4. Top up debit cards upon presentation of valid travel 
document from their account in line with forex bureau rules. 
5. Persons of Ethiopian origin (Foreign Nationals) who have 
deposited funds in their FCY Accounts are entitled to effect 
transfers abroad as long as this amount does not exceed the 
initial balance plus any interest received on the deposited 
amount.   
 
14.7 
Provision of Incentives 
 
14.7.1 The deposit account can serve as collateral to get credit in local 
currency form domestic Authorized Banks in line with the 
opening authorized bank’s credit policy. 
 
15. RETENTION ACCOUNTS ON EXPORTS OF GOODS AND SERVICES: 
 
15.1 
Opening of Forex Retention Accounts 
 
An Authorized Bank is allowed to open foreign exchange retention 
accounts for eligible exporters of goods and services. 
 
15.2 
Retention Rights 
 
i. 
An exporter of goods and services shall have retention rights as 
specified in article 6 of this Directive. 
ii. 
A bank can credit funds in retention accounts only when the recipient 
(beneficiary) has given written authority. 
iii. 
A bank can credit funds in retention account for merchants and/or 
entities licensed by the NBE to collect cash notes and credit 
card/debit card/prepaid card/payments for goods and services they 
sell;  
 
15.3 
Utilization of Foreign Exchange Retention Accounts 
 
15.3.1 The utilization of funds in the Retention Account shall be as 
specified in article 6 of this Directive. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
39 
PART SIX: CAPITAL ACCOUNT 
 
16. CAPITAL REPATRIATION 
 
16.1 
General  
 
Unless explicitly authorized by NBE, capital account transactions by 
residents shall not be permitted and banks shall not effect such capital 
transfers except under the specific exceptions and requirements 
stipulated below.  
 
16.2 
Remittance of Registered Foreign Investments  
 
16.2.1 Foreign investments which are registered by the National 
Bank or Ethiopia Investment Commission and other pertinent 
Government Organ may repatriate the following upon 
National Bank’s approval:- 
 
a. Profit and Dividends accruing from investment;  
b. Proceeds from the sale of liquidation of an enterprise and  
c. Proceeds from the transfer of shares or ownership of an 
enterprise. 
d. Return back of investment if unable to start operation 
e. Profits from portfolio investment in equity securities or debt 
securities  
 
16.3 
Transfers of Profits and Dividends 
 
16.3.1 Investors who earn profits or dividends from recognized and 
registered foreign investments shall be entitled to remit net 
profit/dividend abroad on condition that the following 
documents are submitted to National Bank; 
 
a. Authenticated minutes of the Board of Directors or an 
equivalent body distributing the profit or declaring dividend 
duly signed by the chairman or secretary of the Board 
b. Copy of the usual closing financial documents duly audited by 
an independent third party auditing institution permitted to 
operate in Ethiopia. 
 
 
 
40 
c. Capital registration letter issued by National Bank or 
Investment Authority; 
d. Tax receipts evidencing the payment of all taxes due to the 
government (Business and Dividend tax receipts; 
e. Memorandum & Article of Association or any other similar 
document by whatsoever name it may be referred; 
f. Valid business License; 
g. Application letter; and 
h. Any other document of evidence that the NBE may require. 
 
16.3.2 Branch Offices of foreign companies operating in Ethiopia 
desirous of repatriating foreign exchange shall fulfill the 
requirements enumerated under (b-h) in sub-article 16.3.1. 
 
16.3.3 The NBE shall not deny the repatriation of profits of dividends 
subject to the fulfillment of the above documentary 
requirements.  
 
16.3.4 As an exceptional treatment for any profit and dividend 
amounts that may be outstanding as of the issuance of this 
Directive (involving dividend repatriations approved by NBE 
but for which payment has not been effected by banks), the 
NBE shall stipulate a special repayment schedule to be 
applied to address the backlog of such dividend cases. Such 
a repayment schedule will not apply to any new dividend 
repatriation requests that are initiated after the issuance of this 
Directive, which shall—for such new cases—be accepted 
and settled by banks upon demand. 
 
16.3.5 Remittance of proceeds from liquidation 
 
If an investor ceased operation or closes his/her business, which 
is recognized and registered by the National Bank/Investment 
Authority, the following documents will be required to transfer the 
capital. 
 
a. Minutes of the decisions of shareholders/partners, if organized 
in the form of a legal entity.  
b. Letter of declaration by the owner, in case of sole 
proprietorship. 
 
 
 
41 
c. Liquidation report authenticated by the competent authority 
court and letter from ministry of trade confirming the 
revoke/strike out of the license. 
d. Audited Balance sheet & income statement. 
e. Foreign Capital registration letter  
f. Tax clearance from pertinent Government Authority. 
g. Any other document that may be required by the National 
Bank. 
 
16.3.6 Remittance of proceeds from sales of share 
 
Foreign investor who transfer his/her share-holdings partially or 
wholly to the Ethiopian National and/or foreign investor can apply 
for remittance of sale of shares value by presenting the following 
documents. 
 
a. Updated foreign capital registration certificate and document. 
b. Bank credit advice confirming the receipt of the corresponding 
value in foreign currency, if sold to a foreigner. 
c. Sales agreement authenticated by document registration and 
authentication 
d. Tax Clearance from pertinent Government Organization.  
 
16.3.7 Fund transfer for investment if unable to start operation 
 
Foreign Investor who have registered its foreign investment 
but unable to start operation may made foreign exchange 
remittance upon presentation of confirmation letter from 
Ethiopian Investment Commission. The fund to be transferred 
should not exceed the registered capital.  
 
16.4 
Accounts abroad:  
 
Unless explicitly authorized by NBE, no Ethiopian national, natural or 
juridical person, residing in Ethiopia is permitted to own, possess or 
operate a foreign currency account abroad.  
 
 
 
 
 
42 
17. EXTERNAL LOAN AND SUPPLIER’S CREDITS  
 
17.1 General 
17.1.1 
Borrowings from abroad and repayments  
 
No person may enter into a foreign loan contract without the prior 
consultation with the National Bank in the case of the Government and 
approval by the National Bank in all other cases. Where a loan contract 
is entered in to without fulfilling the requirements of this article foreign 
exchange for the repayment of the loan may be denied 
a. 
External loan guaranteed by Federal Government of Ethiopia 
shall be registered by the National Bank through presenting 
the agreement and the guarantee issued there to. 
b. An eligible borrower except stated under sub-article 17.1.1(a) 
shall first get approval from the National Bank before entering 
to external loan and supplier’s credit agreement with the 
lender/supplier. 
c. 
An eligible borrower shall register the foreign loan remitted in 
cash or in kind by producing the necessary documents. 
d. No repayment in foreign currency may be allowed for the 
purpose of payment of external loan or supplier’s credit unless 
registered by the National Bank. 
e. 
Authorized Bank is allowed to open usance letter of credit for 
an exporter who imports equipment, raw materials, 
Machineries and accessories for his export business against 
future export proceed. 
 
17.2 Eligible Borrowers and Requirements 
 
17.2.1 
Exporter 
 
a. 
An exporter is eligible to acquire an external loan or supplier’s 
credit provided that the acquired loan is going to finance an 
export - oriented investment that generates foreign currency.  
b. A domestic investor who is engaged in projects that generate 
foreign currency is eligible to acquire external loan. 
c. 
The following requirements shall be fulfilled for approval and 
registration of external loan or supplier’s credit to be acquired 
by an exporter: 
 
 
 
43 
 
1. Application letter; 
2. Valid export license given by pertinent licensing authority; 
3. For External loan, the draft loan agreement with detailed 
terms showing interest rates  and applicable charges, loan 
disbursement schedule, repayment schedule, borrower 
lender relationship, purpose of the loan and other 
particulars as may be deemed necessary by the NBE;  
4. For suppliers credit, pro forma invoice with repayment 
period and term of payment; 
5. Document justifying the capacity to repay the loan 
 
17.2.2 Foreign Investor 
 
a. 
A foreign investor is eligible to acquire external loan when it 
fulfills all requirements provided under sub-article 17.2.2(b) and 
(c) of this provision.  
b. The debt to equity ratio may not exceed 60:40 of the foreign 
capital.  
c. 
The following requirements shall be fulfilled for approval of 
external loan and /or supplier’s credit to be acquired by foreign 
investor: 
1. Application letter; 
2. Valid investment or any other valid business license given 
by pertinent licensing authority as the case may be 
applicable. 
3. Foreign capital registration certificate issued by pertinent 
government body  
4. For external loan: the draft loan agreement with detailed 
terms showing interest rates and applicable charges, loan 
disbursement schedule, repayment schedule, borrower 
lender relationship, purpose of the loan and other 
particulars as may be deemed necessary by the National 
Bank; 
5. For suppliers credit, at least 180 days pro-forma invoice 
with repayment period and term. 
 
 
 
 
 
44 
17.2.3 Domestic Manufacturer (Non-exporters) 
 
a. 
A domestic manufacturer is eligible to acquire external loan 
when it fulfills all    requirements of sub-article 17.2.3 (b) and (c) 
of this directive. 
b. The debt to equity ratio may not exceed 60:40 of registered 
capital. 
c. 
 The following requirements shall be fulfilled for approval of 
external loan and/or supplier’s credit to be acquired by a 
domestic manufacturer. 
1. Application letter; 
2. Valid Manufacturing business license given by pertinent 
licensing   authority as the case may be applicable;  
3. Capital 
registration 
certificate 
issued 
by 
pertinent 
government body 
4. For external loan, the draft loan agreement with detailed 
terms showing interest rates and applicable charges, loan 
disbursement schedule. repayment schedule, borrower-
lender relationship, purpose of the loan and other 
particulars as may be deemed necessary by the National 
Bank; 
5. For suppliers credit, Pro-forma invoice with a minimum 
1year credit period and a minimum of 1 year for external 
loan repayment period. 
 
17.2.4 Agricultural Machines/Inputs Imports and LPG Gas import 
 
a. 
An importer of agricultural machines/inputs and LPG Gas is 
eligible to acquire suppliers’ credit when it fulfills all 
requirements of sub-article 17.2.4 (b) and (c) of this directive. 
b. The debt to equity ratio may not exceed 60:40 of registered 
capital in business license 
c. 
The following requirements shall be fulfilled for approval of 
supplier’s credit to be acquired by eligible importer. 
1. Application letter; 
2. Valid business license to import items stated under article 
17.2.4(a) and LPG Gas given by pertinent licensing authority 
as the case may be applicable;  
3. Pro-forma invoice with a minimum 1year credit period  
 
 
 
 
45 
17.2.5 Construction Sector 
 
a. 
A construction sector company is eligible to acquire suppliers 
credit when it fulfills all requirements of sub-article 17.2.5 (b), 
(c) and (d) of this directive. 
b. The debt to equity ratio may not exceed 60:40 of registered 
capital in business license 
c. 
The following requirements shall be fulfilled for approval of 
supplier’s credit: 
1. 
Application letter; 
2. Valid business license; 
3. Pro-forma invoice with a minimum 1year credit period 
and a minimum of 1 year for external loan repayment 
period. 
d. Construction sector imports that may be financed via suppliers 
credit are: 
1. 
Construction machinery such as graders, loaders, 
excavators and road-construction related machinery; 
2. Bitumen used for construction projects; 
 
17.3 Approval and Registration of External loan 
 
a. 
The National Bank shall issue approval letter for external loan 
and suppliers credit if all conditions provided under sub-article 
17.2 of this directive are fulfilled. 
b. The National Bank shall register external loan up on 
presentation of the following documents; 
1. Application letter; 
2. A bank advise (if the loan is in cash) 
3. Customs declaration and all relevant shipping documents 
(if the loan is in kind) 
4. Copy of external loan approval letters 
 
17.4  All-in Cost  
 
17.4.1 The Borrower shall present and transparently disclose the all-in 
cost of an external loan when submitting an application to the 
NBE.  
 
 
 
46 
17.4.2 For the purpose of the “all in cost” calculation, costs such as 
front-end fee, supervision fee etc. shall be dispersed over the 
repayment period of the loan.  
 
17.5 Guarantees 
 
Any form of guarantee may not be issued by government and Bank for 
private loan. 
 
17.6  Repayment of External loan 
 
17.6.1 The National Bank shall approve repayment of external loan 
provided that the loan is approved and registered in the way 
provided under sub-article 17.3 of this directive. 
17.6.2 The following documents should be presented to the National 
Bank for approval of external loan repayment. 
a. Application letter; 
b. Copy of external loan registration letter and 
c. Loan repayment schedule showing the computation of 
principal, interest and other charges as may deemed 
necessary by the National Bank. 
 
18. EXTERNAL LOANS IN KIND  
 
18.1 
General 
 
18.1.1 
External loan in kind guaranteed by Federal Government of 
Ethiopia shall be registered by the National Bank by presenting the 
agreement and the guarantee issued there to. 
18.1.2 An eligible borrower except stated under sub-article 18.1.1 of this 
provision shall first get approval from the National Bank before 
entering to external loan in kind agreement with the lender.  
18.1.3 An eligible borrower shall register the foreign loan in kind by 
producing the necessary documents.  
18.1.4 No repayment in convertible foreign currency may be allowed for 
the purpose of repayment of external loan in kind unless registered 
by the National Bank. 
 
 
 
 
 
47 
18.2 
 Eligible Borrowers and Requirements 
 
18.2.1 Export 
An exporter is eligible to acquire capital good through an external 
loan in kind arrangement, provided that the capital good is going 
to be utilized in export oriented investment that generates foreign 
currency. 
18.2.2 Domestic investor who is engaged in projects that generate foreign 
currency is also eligible to use the external loan in kind arrangement 
to acquire capital goods. 
18.2.3 The following requirements shall be fulfilled for approval of external 
loan in kind to be acquired by an exporter:  
a. Application letter;  
b. Valid export license given by pertinent licensing authority;  
c. The draft loan in kind agreement with detailed terms showing 
the type of agreement, interest rates and applicable charges, 
repayment method and schedule, borrower-lender 
relationship, purpose of the loan and other particulars as may 
be deemed necessary by the National Bank; 
d. Proforma Invoice;  
e. The document justifying the capacity to repay the loan; and 
f. Supporting letter from relevant government body to attest the 
capital goods shall have used for the initial intended purpose 
of acquiring external loan in kind.  
 
18.2.4 Foreign Investor 
A foreign investor is also eligible to use the external loan in kind 
arrangement to acquire capital goods when it fulfills all 
requirements of sub-article (a) and (b) below.  
a. The debt to equity ratio may not exceed 60:40 of the foreign 
capital. 
b. The following requirements shall be fulfilled for approval of 
external loan in kind to be acquired by foreign investor: 
1. Application letter;  
2. Valid investment or any other valid business license given 
by pertinent licensing authority as the case may be 
applicable; 
3. Foreign capital registration certificate issued by pertinent 
government body; 
 
 
 
48 
4. The draft loan agreement with detailed terms showing the 
type of agreement, interest rates and applicable charges, 
repayment method and schedule, borrower-lender 
relationship, purpose of the loan and other particulars as 
may be deemed necessary by the National Bank; 
5. Proforma Invoice; and 
6. Supporting letter from relevant government body to attest 
the capital goods shall have used for the initial intended 
purpose of acquiring external loan in kind. 
 
18.3 
Approval and Registration of External Loan in Kind 
 
18.3.1 The National Bank shall issue approval letter for external loan in 
kind if all conditions provided under sub-article 18.2 of this directive 
are fulfilled. 
18.3.2 The National Bank shall register up on presentation of the following 
documents: 
a. 
Application letter; 
b. Customs declaration and all relevant shipping documents; and  
c. 
Copy of external loan in kind approval letters. 
18.3.3 In registering the external loan in kind when the National Bank has 
found a discrepancy of price for the capital good as recorded 
between the external loan in kind approval letters and the customs 
declaration and all relevant shipping documents, it shall register the 
lesser prices of the capital good as external loan in kind.  
18.3.4 Notwithstanding the provision of sub-article 18.3.3 of this directive, 
if the external loan in kind was acquired through lease agreement, 
the National Bank shall support or cause to be registered the lease 
agreement at relevant registering organ of the government. 
 
18.4 All- in- Cost 
 
18.4.1 The Borrower shall present and transparently disclose the all-in 
cost of an external loan in kind when submitting an application to 
the NBE.  
18.4.2 For the purpose of the “all in cost” calculation, costs such as front-
end fee, supervision fee etc. shall be dispersed over the repayment 
period of the loan.  
 
 
 
 
49 
18.5 Guarantees 
 
Any form of guarantee may not be issued by government and bank 
for private loan in-kind. 
 
18.6 Repayment of External Loan in Kind 
 
18.6.1 The National Bank shall approve repayment of external loan in kind 
provided that the repayment request is as per the conditions 
mentioned in sub-article 18.3 of this Directive. 
18.6.2 The following documents should be presented to the National Bank 
for approval of an external loan in kind repayment: 
a. Application letter;  
b. Copy of external loan in kind registration letter; and 
c. Loan repayment schedule showing the computation of 
principal, interest, and other charges in accordance with 
approved arrangement and as may deemed necessary by the 
National Bank.     
 
19.  SPECIAL ALLOWANCES FOR OFFSHORE ACCOUNTS 
 
19.1 
Eligible Strategic Sectors 
 
19.1.1 
The following Strategic Foreign Direct Investment Projects are 
eligible to open an Off-shore account to deposit the proceeds from 
their equity and loan financing sources: 
a. A PPP project in the power generation and infrastructure sector 
that has large capital investment needs; 
b. A large mining project with a substantial export-earning 
potential; and  
c. Any other Strategic Foreign Direct Investment Project deemed 
eligible to   qualify for such treatment by the NBE’s Executive 
Management, 
considering 
among 
others 
their 
special 
significance and contribution in terms of size, job creation, 
import substitute, foreign exchange inflows, technology 
transfer, or sector specific impact.  
 
 
 
 
 
50 
19.2 
Eligible Payments 
 
19.2.1 The eligible payments that can be covered from the Offshore 
Account are: 
a. External debt service, including any debt service reserve 
accounts: 
b. Insurance, contractor, and other warranty claims in foreign 
exchange: 
c. Capital or investment expenses; and  
d. Maintenance and operation expenses. 
 
19.3 
Debt-to-Equity Ratio 
 
19.3.1 
The debt to equity ratio may not exceed 80:20 of the foreign 
capital  
19.3.2  Notwithstanding sub-article 19.3.1 of this directive, the NBE Board 
may give special approval in a case by case basis if the case is 
found to be acceptable. 
 
19.4 Foreign Currency Convertibility Guarantee 
 
19.4.1 
The Foreign Currency Convertibility guarantee shall only apply to 
strategic PPP energy and mining sector projects for loan 
repayment and dividend repatriation, and only after the project 
owner has exhausted all means to purchase foreign exchange 
from banks.  
19.4.2 
Any foreign currency conversion shall be done at the prevailing 
official rate, and will never take precedence over the servicing of 
sovereign external debt. 
 
 
 
 
 
51 
 
19.5 
Transparency Requirements 
 
 
The National Bank shall have the right to monitor any contracts associated 
with offshore accounts to ensure there are no malpractices involved. 
 
19.6 Reporting Requirements 
 
19.6.1 
Financial statements of the strategic foreign direct investment 
project shall be provided to the National Bank on a quarterly basis, 
clearly showing the inflows and outflows of the Offshore Account; 
19.6.2 The Strategic Foreign Direct Investment Project shall provide 
annual projections of expected foreign exchange inflows and 
outflows for National Bank’s foreign exchange monitoring 
purposes. 
 
19.7 
Applicability of Other Articles 
 
The relevant provisions of article 17 on External Loan and Supplier’s Credit 
shall be applicable with respect to matters not covered under article 19. 
 
20. FOREIGN PORTFOLIO FLOWS 
20.1 
Foreign portfolio inflows seeking to participate in Ethiopia’s capital markets 
shall be permitted to do so subject to specific regulatory requirements that 
shall be set by the National Bank and the Ethiopian Capital Markets 
Authority (ECMA). 
 
20.1.1 
Participation in capital markets shall only be through the formally 
established Ethiopian Securities Exchange (ESX) or other such 
securities markets that are licensed to operate by the ECMA. 
20.1.2 
The NBE shall set requirements on the types of foreign portfolio 
inflows that are eligible and qualified to participate in the capital 
markets, including limits that may apply based on type of 
institution, source of funding, track record of investor, or other 
pertinent criteria.   
20.1.3 
The NBE shall also set maximum ownership shares of any given 
security (equity or bond) that may be owned by foreign portfolio 
investors.  
 
 
 
52 
20.1.4 The NBE may also set minimum mandatory periods for which a 
given foreign portfolio investor needs to be invested before 
seeking to exit and/or unwind its portfolio position.  
20.1.5 The NBE may also put in place specific modalities for the treatment 
of foreign portfolio inflows and outflows, including if deemed 
necessary escrow type arrangements for the placement of the 
initial foreign portfolio flows and the subsequent handling of 
outbound portfolio flows.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
53 
PART SEVEN: MISCELLANEOUS ITEMS 
 
21. SPECIAL ALLOWANCE FOR INDUSTRIAL PARKS AND SPECIAL ECONOMIC 
ZONES (SEZs) 
 
21.1 General 
 
The provisions of this article shall apply to Industrial Parks not designated as 
SEZs as well as to Special Economic Zones per the relevant Proclamations.  
 
21.2  Industrial Parks not designated as SEZs: Purchasing and Selling of 
Raw Materials with Foreign Currency 
 
21.2.1 
An investor may buy, in foreign currency, raw materials or inputs 
manufactured by another investor within the same industrial park 
or across another industrial park from its foreign currency and/or 
retention account. 
21.2.2 
An investor may sell its manufactured product within the industrial 
park as an input to another investor within same industrial park or 
across another industrial park in foreign currency via credits to its 
retention account. 
 
21.2.3 
Opening of Foreign Currency Account to Foreign Employee of 
Industrial Park  
a. 
An investor may pay the salary of its foreign employee in 
foreign currency from its retention account or foreign currency 
account. 
b. A foreign employee of an industrial park is allowed to open 
foreign currency account within a bank located in the industrial 
park by submitting application letter, work permit, resident ID 
and employment contract showing monthly salary which is 
payable in foreign currency. 
c. 
The foreign currency account of the foreign employee shall be 
credited to the maximum of his net monthly salary.  
d. A foreign employee may transfer abroad or reconvert into Birr 
at any time from his/her foreign currency account, per Annex 
Three, article 8.  
21.2.4 
Export and import Permit issuance for trade within and between 
industrial parks  
 
 
 
54 
a. 
Authorized Banks may issue interim export permit to an 
investor upon submission of all relevant export documents to 
sell its product as a raw material to another investor within an 
industrial park or another investor in other industrial park. 
b. 
A bank may issue interim import permit to an investor upon 
submission of all relevant import documents to buy a raw 
material from another investor within industrial park or 
another investor in other industrial park. 
c. 
The permit issued under sub articles (a) and (b) of this article 
shall be coded with specific code given by the Bank.  
 
21.3 Special Economic Zones (including Industrial Parks designated as 
SEZs) 
 
Consistent with the Special Economic Zone Proclamation No 1322/2024 or 
amendment thereof, the following special treatment shall apply for 
companies operating in SEZs.  
 
21.3.1 
Companies in SEZs are required to repatriate the full value of their 
foreign exchange earnings.  
21.3.2 
Companies in Special Economic Zones that generate exports and 
receive foreign currency earnings shall be free of any retention 
rules specified under article 6 of this Directive, and are thus 
entitled to retain 100% of their foreign exchange earnings.  
21.3.3 
Companies in SEZs may effect foreign currency transfers abroad 
for any current account transactions or capital account 
transactions. 
21.3.4 
Companies in SEZs may effect payments in foreign currency 
terms for goods and services purchased from the customs 
territory of Ethiopia; such purchases by SEZ entities shall be 
considered exports of the customs territory of Ethiopia.  
21.3.5 
Companies operating in Special Economic Zones may receive 
payments in foreign currency terms for goods and services sold to 
the customs territory of Ethiopia; such sales by SEZ entities shall 
be considered imports of the customs territory of Ethiopia 
21.3.6 
Companies in SEZs may conduct transactions in foreign currency 
basis within the confines and territory of the Special Economic 
Zone. 
 
 
 
55 
21.3.7 
The National Bank shall issue guidelines governing the selection 
criteria, standards, and operating and licensing requirements of 
banks or financial institutions operating in SEZs. 
 
22. CASH LIMITS 
 
22.1  Limits on Cash Note Holdings by Authorized Banks 
 
22.1.1 
Authorized Banks can only hold up to 10 percent of their paid-up 
capital in foreign currency cash notes as working balance at the 
close of each calendar month. Any excess holding shall be 
surrendered to the National Bank within 5 working days from the 
end of the calendar month. 
22.1.2 
Notwithstanding the provisions of sub-article 22.1.1 herein above, 
Authorized Banks have the right to sell part of their foreign 
currency holding at any time if they wish to do so. 
22.1.3 
Authorized Banks are allowed to trade and hold currencies which 
have a reasonable turnover and advantageous to them but limited 
to the list provided by National Bank. 
 
22.2  Conversion Requirement 
 
22.2.1 
Authorized Banks shall furnish National Bank along with the cash 
note stocks delivered, the list of currencies identified by type of 
currencies, serial numbers and denominations when presented 
for conversion. 
22.2.2 If the Authorized Bank surrendering the cash notes opts to credit 
the proceeds into its correspondent bank account, the National 
Bank will value of the cash notes delivered. However, the 
authorized banks shall pay to National Bank a service charge of 
0.5% on the total.  
22.2.3 Trading margin cost is for the account of authorized banks to 
which they will be required to submit a standing authorization to 
debit their Reserve Account with National Bank after the 
completion of the trade abroad. 
22.2.4 In the event the Authorized Banks wish to sell their foreign 
currency notes to National Bank in Birr, the Bank will purchase the 
notes on the basis of the Indicative Daily Exchange Rate for that 
day. No charges will be levied on such purchases. 
 
 
 
 
56 
22.3  Responsibility of Authorized Banks 
 
22.3.1 
Authorized Banks shall take due care to verify and check the cash 
notes purchased are not counterfeit using reliable detecting 
machines and necessary skills. 
22.3.2 Authorized Banks shall register the full identity of the seller while 
buying the notes. 
22.3.3 Authorized Bank shall be responsible for the counterfeits in case 
found in the process of trading and the equivalent in Birr shall be 
debited to their reserve account with National Bank. Reports of 
counterfeits and the price at which the trade is concluded shall be 
delivered to Authorized Banks by National Bank for their 
documentations. 
 
22.4  Supply of Foreign Currency Cash Notes 
 
22.4.1 
Authorized Banks that are in need of foreign currency cash notes 
might be supplied from the stocks of the National Bank upon 
written request 
22.4.2 Authorized bank shall credit the National Bank’s account in 
equivalent foreign currency cash notes supplied. The rates 
applicable for cash deal and delivery shall be linked to the 
Indicative Daily Exchange Rate. 
22.4.3 In case the Authorized Bank wish to buy foreign currency cash 
notes against birr the rate applicable for cash deal and delivery 
shall be the Indicative Daily Exchange Rate. The selling price shall 
be the prevailing selling rate of the day. 
 
22.5  Prohibitions 
 
Authorized Banks are neither allowed to engage in the shipment of foreign 
currency cash notes abroad nor can they either order or receive a 
consignment of foreign currency cash notes. 
 
22.6  Birr Holding Limit for Persons Entering or Departing Ethiopia   
 
22.6.1 
A person entering into and departing from Ethiopia may hold up to 
a maximum of Birr 3,000.00 (Birr Three Thousand) per travel to 
and from Ethiopia. 
 
 
 
57 
22.6.2 Notwithstanding the limit set under sub-article 22.6.1 of this article, 
a person travelling to Djibouti or other port cities in neighboring 
countries may hold up to a maximum amount of Birr 10,000 (Birr 
Ten Thousand) per travel.  
 
22.7  Time Limit for holding and conversion of Foreign Currency  
 
22.7.1 
a person residing in Ethiopia enters into the territory of Ethiopia 
carrying a foreign currency shall convert all foreign currency at an 
authorized forex bureau for the equivalent sum in Birr or deposit to 
his/her foreign currency account within 30 days (thirty days) from 
date of entry stamped on the travel document by the Immigration 
and Citizenship Service. However, he/she has to present customs 
declaration if the foreign currency amount exceeds USD 10,000 
(USD Ten Thousand) or equivalent in any other convertible foreign 
currency while depositing into foreign currency account. 
22.7.2 Notwithstanding sub-article 22.7.1 of this Directive, the Foreign 
National of Ethiopian Origin or Ethiopian National not residing in 
Ethiopia who enters Ethiopia carrying foreign currency and intends 
to stay for more than 90 days (ninety days), shall deposit such a 
foreign currency into his/her Non-resident (NR) Foreign Currency 
Account within ninety days from date of entry stamped on the travel 
document by the Immigration and Citizenship Service. However, if 
the foreign currency amount exceeds USD 10,000 (USD Ten 
Thousand) or equivalent in any other convertible foreign currency, 
he/she has to present a customs declaration while depositing into 
a foreign currency account or converting the foreign currency at 
an authorized forex bureau for the equivalent sum in Birr.  
22.7.3 A foreigner not residing in Ethiopia enters into the country carrying 
foreign currency may hold the foreign currency in his/her 
possession up to the visa validity period. 
22.7.4  a person residing in Ethiopia who purchase foreign currency from 
a bank, may carry such foreign currency for a period of thirty (30) 
days from the date of a bank advice and has to convert it at an 
authorized forex bureau for the equivalent sum in Birr within thirty 
(30) days.  
 
22.8 Customs Declaration of Foreign Currency 
 
22.8.1 
Customs Declaration of Foreign Currency 
 
 
 
58 
 
a. A person residing in Ethiopia, Foreign national of Ethiopian 
Origin, Ethiopian National or foreigner not resident in Ethiopia 
entering into the country from abroad carrying foreign 
currency exceeding USD 10,000 (Ten Thousand) or equivalent 
in any other convertible foreign currency shall declare by using 
foreign currency Customs Declaration Form prepared for this 
purpose on arrival at Airport or any other entry point in to the 
country. 
b. Entering passengers carrying foreign currency not exceeding 
USD 10,000 or equivalent shall not be expected to declare 
such currency holdings to customs authorities upon entry.  
c. Transit passengers are exempted from any foreign currency 
declaration requirement and shall not be expected to declare 
such currency holdings to customs authorities upon entry. 
 
22.8.2 Permissible amount of Foreign Currency for Travel Abroad  
 
a. Person residing in Ethiopia is allowed to travel abroad by 
carrying a foreign currency if he/she present a bank advice 
issued for the purchase of the foreign currency within a period 
of thirty (30) days from the date of a bank advice.  
b. Non-resident Foreign National of Ethiopian Origin and 
Ethiopian National not residing in Ethiopia is allowed to travel 
abroad by carrying a foreign currency 
i. if he /she present a bank advice issued for the purchase of 
the foreign currency within a period of thirty (30) days from 
the date of a bank advice.  
ii.  if he/she enters into the territory of Ethiopia carrying a 
foreign currency from abroad and travel back within 90 
days from date of entry stamped on the travel document by 
the Immigration and Citizenship Service, however he/she 
has to present customs declaration if the foreign currency 
amount exceeds USD 10,000 (USD Ten Thousand) or 
equivalent in any other convertible foreign currency.  
c. Embassy Employee, Temporary Worker of different foreign 
institution or workshop participant or trainer who entered into 
the country can carry foreign currency exceeding USD 10,000 
(USD Ten Thousand) or the equivalent in other convertible 
foreign currencies only when he/she can produce a bank 
 
 
 
59 
advice or employer’s letter or a supporting letter from 
workshop coordinator which justifies the acquisition of the 
foreign currency is from a legal source.  
 
22.8.3 Other Foreign Currency Holding  
 
A person entering into the territory of Ethiopia from a neighboring 
country using land transport carrying other foreign currency 
having value more than or equivalent of USD 500 (USD Five 
Hundred) in conversion shall declare at the border customs’ 
branches or stations and may travel abroad by carrying such 
declared amount by presenting customs declaration.  
 
22.8.4 Reporting Requirement  
 
a. The Ethiopian Customs Commission is required to send a copy 
of every foreign currency customs declaration to the National 
Bank every month within the first five working days of the next 
month.  
b. The Ethiopian Customs Commission is also required to submit 
any other report related to foreign currency customs 
declaration when requested by the National Bank.  
 
22.8.5 Prohibition 
 
a. Unless otherwise provided by this directive or pertinent laws or 
without authorization of the National Bank, a  person  may not 
transfer  or  pay foreign currency  in cash to a third party either 
as donation or  gift or to discharge any obligation.  
b. Unless otherwise provided by this directive or pertinent laws or 
without authorization of the National Bank, a person may not 
hold or carry foreign currency.  
c. It is prohibited to undertake any cash transactions in foreign 
currency in Ethiopia, unless for the specific cases authorized 
by NBE. 
 
 
 
 
 
60 
23. REPORTING REQUIREMENTS 
 
23.1 Per the specific provisions laid out in this Directive, the following 
reporting requirements shall apply and be enforceable: 
 
23.1.1 
Exchange Rates used for Banks’ Daily FX Transactions. 
23.1.2 
Foreign Exchange Cashflow on a monthly basis. 
23.1.3 
Remittance Report on a monthly basis . 
23.1.4 
Data related to foreign exchange transactions by local merchants 
and entities on a monthly basis with details of credit/debit card, 
cash notes, and related transactions.  
23.1.5 
FCY Account Opening Report on a monthly basis, for all 
categories of FCY Accounts; 
23.1.6 
FX Transaction Report of Forex Bureaus on a monthly basis and in 
the prescribed form; 
23.1.7 
Monthly Reports on permits granted for exports, imports, and 
services.  
23.1.8 
Monthly reports in prescribed forms indicating foreign exchange 
transactions for Import and Export transit, for Import and Export 
freight, insurance and salary expenses. 
23.1.9 
Monthly transfers of air ticket sales proceeds by foreign airlines (if 
applicable) in the prescribed format. 
23.1.10 The reporting deadlines for the above data shall be specified by 
the National Bank. 
 
23.2 The NBE shall advise banks and authorized foreign exchange dealers of 
additional reporting requirements that may be needed beyond the data to 
be collected through the online and automated FEMOUS reporting 
system. 
 
 
 
 
 
61 
24. PENALTIES AND INSPECTIONS 
 
24.1  Penalties 
 
24.1.1 
Any bank or other licensed entities that fail to comply with the 
requirements of any provision of this Directive shall be subject to 
fines and other penalties consistent with Article 26 of the National 
Bank of Ethiopia Establishment (as Amended) Proclamation No. 
591/2008”. 
24.1.2 
Penalties applied shall be in the amount of USD 2,500 (USD Two-
thousand five-hundred) per violation of this Directive. 
24.1.3 
The NBE will have the discretion to impose additional financial and 
administrative penalties, including license revocation, temporary 
service suspension or any others as appropriate. In addition, 
consistent with the NBE Establishment Proclamation, further legal 
and criminal penalties may apply. 
24.1.4 The NBE’s Governor or Vice Governor (Monetary Stability Cluster) 
shall have the discretion to decide on the specific penalties 
applicable for particular violations of this Directive. 
 
24.2 Inspection 
 
24.2.1 
The NBE may undertake an inspection of any Authorized Bank or 
NBE licensed entities at any time to verify compliance with this 
Directive: 
24.2.2 Inspectors of the NBE are authorized to request the personnel of 
Authorized Bank such documents, information or explanations or 
the records or transactions that deemed necessary. 
24.2.3 With 
respect 
to 
merchants 
authorized 
to 
accept 
prepaid/credit/debit cards, cash notes, and travelers’ cheques, the 
NBE may conduct inspection at any time on the premises of such 
merchants. The inspection may include reviewing of books of 
accounts, request for information or explanations of the records of 
transactions, and examination of records related to payments 
received against prepaid/credit/debit cards, cash notes, and 
travelers’ cheques. 
24.2.4 Any form of examination can be conducted by an NBE inspection 
team at any time.  
 
 
 
 
 
62 
25. OTHER MISCELLANEOUS 
 
25.1  Revisions to Articles in this Directive  
25.1.1 
The National Bank may amend the provisions of this Directive from 
time to time by issuing a Directive. 
 
25.2  Repealed Directives 
25.2.1 
All foreign exchange directives and circulars hitherto issued by the 
National Bank are hereby repealed and replaced by this Directive. 
 
25.3  Effective Date of this Directive 
25.3.1 
This Directive shall be effective as of July 29, 2024. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
63 
 
 
 
ANNEXES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
64 
ANNEX ONE: EXPORT-RELATED REQUIREMENTS 
 
1. Applicable Mode of Payment for Export: 
 
1.1 Authorized banks shall use the under listed mode of payments for export 
of goods.  
 
1.1.1 
Letter of credit at sight and on acceptance 
1.1.2 Cash Against Document at sight and on acceptance 
1.1.3 Advance payment received in the form of:- 
a. 
Bank transfers 
b. 
Debit card/Credit card 
c. 
Cash notes declared at customs and deposited at forex-bureau  
1.1.4 Consignment sales which is applicable to perishable items such as fruits, 
cut flowers, meat, molasses and others as may be approved by the 
National Bank. 
1.1.5 Open account basis which shall be applicable for e-commerce exports 
and any other export transactions explicitly granted permission by NBE. 
 
1.2 Document Requirement for Exports  
 
Authorized Banks shall allow Export of goods, other than gold, against 
submission of the following documents through the Electronic Single Window 
System as applicable: 
 
1.2.1 Export by Letter of Credit  
Authorized Banks shall allow exports for goods to be exported abroad 
on against verification of the following documents  
a. Valid foreign trade license for export,  
b. Authenticated irrevocable and/or confirmed letter of credit 
basis advised through the local bank  
c. Export application form duly completed 
d. Invoice duly completed. The invoices could be chamberized as 
the case may be. 
e. Sales contract  
1.2.2 Export by Cash Against document 
All documents under sub-article 1.2.1 above except (b) 
1.2.3  Exports under advance payment  
 
 
 
65 
a. Exporters who wish to obtain export applications under 
advance payments are required to submit the documents 
indicated under sub-article 1.2.1 above excluding (b) and  
b. bank transfer advices. 
c. Advance payments shall be valid only for a period of one year.  
 
1.2.4 Exports on Consignment Basis 
Exporters who wish to obtain export applications on consignment 
basis are required to submit the following documents:- 
a. All documents indicated under sub-article 1.2.1 above 
excluding (b)  are required; 
b. Undertaking letter in writing for repatriation of Export 
proceeds. 
 
1.2.5 Exports on Open Account Basis  
Exporters who utilize Open Account means of payment shall be 
required to present: 
a. Undertaking letter in writing for repatriation of Export 
proceeds. 
b. Other requirements as shall be specified by NBE at a future 
date.  
 
1.3 Applicable Terms of payment  
 
1.3.1 Letter of Credit 
Authorized Banks shall allow exports for goods to be exported 
abroad on: 
a. L/C payment at sight under irrevocable and/or confirmed letter of 
credit basis. 
b. L/C acceptance basis provided that : 
i. The payment shall be secured by irrevocable confirmed Letter 
of Credit advised through a local bank. 
ii. The acceptance period shall be contained within the L/C 
validity date and is consistent with the 90 days repatriation 
time allowed. 
iii. The maximum allowable time for the L/C acceptance shall be 
60 days. 
 
 
 
 
 
66 
1.3.2 Cash Against Document 
Authorized Banks shall allow export of goods on CAD at sight or on 
acceptance basis, except chat and live animals, provided: 
a. The repatriation of the foreign exchange value is to be secured 
within 90 days from the date of the issue of export permit. 
b. The exporter shall take a full undertaking in writing stating to 
repatriate its obligation the amount involved in the permit 
issued and that S/He does not apply to other banks and the 
bank its branches for CAD payment. 
c. The maximum allowable amount for any export under CAD 
mode of payment for a single permit shall not exceed USD 
500,000 (USD Five-Hundred Thousand). Subsequent permits 
shall only be issued upon full repatriation of the allowable 
amount.  
d. With the ceiling of USD 500,000 (USD Five Hundred 
Thousand), exporters shall have access to the remaining 
balance if permits already issued for a less value 
e. National Bank shall give approval for export permit for value 
exceeding USD 500,000.00 (USD Five-Hundred Thousand) 
on a case by case basis. 
 
1.3.3 Advance Payment  
a. Authorized Banks are required to check their records to 
confirm that the export amount do not exceed the foreign 
exchange amount receipt in advance and also has not been 
utilized before.  
b. The export permit issued under advance payment shall be in 
the name of the remitter only. However, National Bank may 
give special waiver based on the nature of trade.  
c. Foreign currency receipts can be considered as an advance 
payment for future export if and only if:- 
i. Marked as “Advance payment for future export” or “Advance 
payment for future import” if the intention is to show the buyer  
ii. State the type of commodity to be exported or the invoice no. 
or the contract no. of the transaction, as the case may be, 
using the money transferred in advance if and only if NBE 
provides approval.  
iii. Export permit shall be issued only through an Authorized Bank 
branch which issued the credit advice as evidence of foreign 
currency receipt; 
 
 
 
67 
iv. Foreign currency credit advice issued for future export shall 
be valid for export or refund for the period of one year only; 
However National Bank may give extension based on the 
nature of the problem faced by the exporter. 
 
1.3.4 Exports on Consignment Basis 
a. Exporters who wish to obtain export permits on a consignment 
basis shall repatriate funds upon receipt of payment for export 
goods delivered.  
b. The repatriation of the foreign exchange value is to be secured 
within 90 days from the date of the issue of export permit 
made under consignment basis. 
 
1.3.5 Open account 
The repatriation of the foreign exchange received under Open 
Account shall be applicable for e-commerce exports and any other 
export types that NBE may designate from time to time. 
 
1.3.6 Export Delivered at EX-Works (EXW)  
Exporters may agree for sales and delivery of goods at a price 
calculated on the basis of costs at Ex-Factory or at inland dry port 
named where the buyer preferred the purchase point to be fixed as 
prescribed under annex six, sub-article 1.1.2 of this directive.  
 
1.3.7 Way Bills for exports to be issued in the name of a Local Bank 
a. 
Notwithstanding any agreement to the contrary, bills of lading, 
airway bill or any other document evidencing shipment of goods 
from Ethiopia to any destination abroad shall be made out to the 
order of a bank duly licensed to operate in Ethiopia or the 
opening bank abroad for payments arrangement on letter of 
credit and cash against document. However, bill of lading can be 
issued in the name of the buyer or his/her agent for the following 
payment arrangements. 
i. Advance payment 
ii. Consignment 
b. Exporters or forwarding Agents shall indicate in their shipping 
instruction to the shipping companies or ship agents the name of 
the bank in whose favor that documents to be made out or the 
buyer who would receive the consignment in whose name the bill 
 
 
 
68 
of lading, airway bill or any other equivalent document shall be 
issued in respect of the valuable goods to be shipped. 
c. 
Upon receipt of the bills of lading or the equivalent documents 
issued in respect of the shipment of goods entrusted to them for 
export, forwarding or shipping agents shall, under their 
responsibility, deliver them to the Authorized Bank in Ethiopia to 
whose order the shipping documents were issued.  
d. Authorized Banks bear the responsibility for ensuring that export 
proceeds for all export permits approved are repatriated into the 
country within 90 days, except flower from the date of issue of 
export permits for all modes of payments applicable and within 
Banks have to make follow-ups and exercise a reasonable care 
and take measures to insure timely repatriation of proceed. 
 
1.4 Special Mode of Payment Rules for certain products and destinations 
 
1.4.1 Exports of chat, livestock, and injera are only permitted with L/C and 
Advance mode of payments.  
1.4.2 Exports to Sudan and to Somalia are only permitted with L/C or 
Advance mode of payments.  
1.4.3 Exports to Somalia and Djibouti can be effected through advance 
payments via a money transfer service company authorized by NBE. 
In cases of such advance payments for exports, this should mention 
the purpose of the advance as being for future export payment and 
the type of commodity.  
 
1.5 Special Case of Flower Exports  
 
1.5.1 Sales arrangement shall be carried out in the following two forms:- 
a. 
Direct Sales 
i. Contract base sales 
ii. Consignment sales 
iii. Negotiated sales 
b. Sales at the Auction Market 
1.5.2 The Mode of Payments Applicable for Flower Exports are all mode of 
payment stated under : 
a. 
Consignment sales (open accounts); 
b. Letter of Credit (sight, acceptance up to 20 days for roses and 
summer flowers); and 50 days for cuttings; 
 
 
 
69 
c. 
Cash Against Document (sight, acceptance up to 20 days for 
rose and summer flowers); and 50 days for cuttings; 
d. Advance payment (transferred through banking system). 
 
1.5.3 Flower Export Permit Processing by Banks 
 
The following shall apply for processing flower export permits. 
a. 
All requirements indicated under annex one of this directive for 
processing export permits, monitoring the foreign exchange 
repatriation and documentation requirements shall be applicable 
for the export of flower as well. 
b. In addition to sub-article 1.5.3  (a) of this directive: 
i. Exporters are required to indicate on the export application the 
market where the flower is intended to be sold (Auction 
Market/Direct Market) and the type of currency and the 
delegated agent. In addition, they shall indicate the types of 
flowers, unit of measurement, unit price, volume /gross and net 
weight / and value. 
ii. Applicable currency for all types of flower export shall be in 
USD, Euro, Pound Sterling or Yen or other convertible 
currencies as determined by National Bank and repatriation 
shall be in same currency as in the permit. 
iii. Exporters are also required to submit the following documents 
along with the application: 
• Registration certificate or acceptance letter to participate at 
the specified auction center; 
• Agreement signed with the intermediary agent authorized 
for handling the sales of the flower at the auction center; 
• Purchase contract or requisition for supply of flower from 
the buyer (not applicable for auction sales); and 
• Evidence that shows the applicant is properly performing 
or has already performed its obligation in relation to a 
royalty agreement in which the applicant is a party. 
iv. If exporters are using a specific bank and branch to process 
their export permits, items required under the above sub-
article 1.5.3 (b (iii)) of bullet number 2 and 3 of this directive can 
be placed in permanent file and may not be necessary to 
attach with every export application. However, if changes are 
made the exporter is responsible to update the file and duly 
inform their client bank. 
 
 
 
70 
v. On the export application to be presented, the quantity and 
type of flower to be exported shall be expressed in number of 
stems for cuttings and kg in case of roses and summer flowers, 
including the total estimated value in foreign currency and the 
estimated price per stem and kg respectively. Partial shipment 
scheduled should aggregate and tally to the quantity and value 
expressed in the original application. 
vi. Any partial shipment effected should bear the original permit 
number issued by its bank and partial shipment reference to 
which the quantity shipped is supposed to be consistent to the 
balance remaining under permit. Exporters should, therefore, 
carefully check the balance and process the export, provided 
sufficient balance in terms of quantity is available under the 
export permit. 
vii. The maximum validity of flower export permit shall be up to last 
day of the month in which the permit is issued. And there will 
be no extension. 
 
1.5.4 Minimum Net Selling Price of Flowers, FOB Basis 
    
a. High land  
i. 
Roses: USD 4.2612/kg 
ii. 
Summer flower: USD 4.7822/kg 
b. Mid-Land  
i. 
Roses: USD 4.3340/kg 
ii. 
Summer flower: USD 4.5475/kg 
c. Low land  
i. 
Roses:  USD 4.6602/kg 
ii. 
Summer flower:  USD 6.3699/kg 
 
1.5.5 Authorized Banks shall have the responsibility to ensure that the 
export permits they issue duly reflect the broad categories of flower 
as stated under sub-article 1.5.4 and at least the minimum net prices 
as stated under the above sub articles.  
1.5.6 The Ethiopian Customs Commission shall check and record flower 
export in accordance with the price measurement as stated under a 
to c of the above sub-article 1.5.4. 
1.5.7 Repatriation of Export Proceeds: 
a. 
Exporters shall have the responsibility to repatriate fully the 
amount obtained from the sale of their rose and summer flower 
 
 
 
71 
exports within 30 days and cutting flower export within 60 days 
from the date of shipment. However, National Bank may for good 
cause grant reasonable extension of time beyond the respective 
stated repatriation dates set above 
b. Transfer of payments by the auction agent or the direct buyers 
shall clearly identify the bank permit or partial shipment reference 
and the appropriate references from the exporter. This 
requirement shall also be included on each invoice issued by the 
exporter in order to draw the awareness of buyers or the 
processing agents. 
c. 
For documentation purpose any deductions retained out of the 
export proceeds for the purposes of covering agents’ fees and 
processing costs should clearly be stated in the transfer 
documents by providing details regarding the client Bank permit 
number or partial shipment reference number and others.  
d. Notwithstanding sub-article 1.5.7.(a) of this article banks might 
extend the time for repatriation up to a maximum of 15 (Fifteen) 
days for request on reasonable ground and report the extension 
to NBE and the pertinent government agency.  
 
1.6 Small Export Items  
 
Authorized Banks shall allow small export items to tourists, foreign residents or 
Ethiopian Nationals who wish to take souvenirs. The small export items shall 
be sent abroad for sample, gift, repair, replacement, exhibition and trade fair 
and personal effects and belongings etc. Authorized Banks shall allow small 
export items for the following, subject to meeting the relevant quality or 
standards requirements set by the regulatory body 
a. Limited quantity of souvenir items for value not exceeding USD 
5,000.00 (USD five-thousand) which a tourist (Non-Resident) 
has purchased with local currency. If the value exceeds USD 
5,000.00 (USD five-thousand) or equivalent in any other 
convertible currency provided that the person present signed and 
sealed declaration and Forex Bureau ticket. 
b. Household goods, personal effects and souvenirs of an emigrant 
authorized by authorized Banks to be taken out of Ethiopia. 
Souvenirs, products or manufactures of Ethiopia that do not exceed the 
aggregate value of Birr 50,000.00 (Birr fifty-thousand) which a resident of 
Ethiopia with a re-entry visa going abroad may wish to take with him as gifts 
 
 
 
72 
for friends but not for business purpose. Additional value may be allowed 
against foreign currency receipt in the banking system. 
a. 
Samples of Ethiopian products or manufactures for promoting 
exports not exceeding 5 kilos and incase of semi-processed 
hides and skins not exceeding 1 dozen, leather and leather 
products and textile products 1 pc each respectively as per 
pertinent Government institutions approval. In case of coffee, 
the weight to be taken out shall not exceed two kilos per adult 
passenger. If the value and volume exceeds Additional samples 
may be allowed against payment of foreign exchange. 
b. Machinery or equivalent or spare parts thereof sent abroad for 
repair or replacement and to be subsequently re-imported 
subject to a guarantee deposit of 100% of the invoice value in a 
blocked bank account, in case of private sector or a letter of 
undertaking from the exporting department in the case of the 
public sector to be released upon presentation of evidence to 
authorized Banks proving the re-importation of the item. 
c. 
Machinery, technical equipment or any other item and spare 
parts thereof to be exported from Ethiopia having been originally 
imported temporarily for specific use. 
d. Items imported into Ethiopia, under whatever modality, for repair 
purposes, provided the repair cost has been paid in foreign 
exchange 
e. 
Samples of Ethiopian products sent for promoting exports of 
agricultural products, semi-processed or processed hides and 
skins, others of manufactured articles and mine products whose 
value not exceeding USD 1,000.00 (USD one thousand). 
Additional samples may be allowed against payment of the value 
in foreign exchange from outside source or foreign currency 
account maintained in the country. 
f. 
Non-returnable sample sent abroad for testing purpose, such as 
packing materials (bottles, carts etc and others 
g. Spare parts imported but not salable to be sent abroad based on 
the buy-back agreement against blocking birr equivalent until 
repatriation the sales value in foreign currency.  
h. Other exceptional cases not provided for above and where the 
NBE grants approval.  
 
 
 
 
 
73 
1.7 Export of Goods on Temporary Basis 
 
Authorized banks shall allow temporary export permit for the following 
goods:- 
a. 
Machinery equipment or specialized products thereof, sent 
abroad for repair, replacement and to be subsequently re-
imported will be subject to a guarantee deposit of the equivalent 
to 50% invoice value in birr in a blocked bank account or 
submission of bank guarantee acceptable from abroad at local 
bank. However National Bank may lower the guarantee deposit 
rate based on the nature and value of the item and credibility of 
the applicant.   
b. In case temporary export permit requested for part of the 
machineries or equipment whereby price cannot be produced by 
invoice, the authorized bank shall take the estimated value 
declared by the exporter. The exporter has to issue letter 
undertaking to confirm the declared estimated value is genuine 
and also to return the goods in due time after maintenance or 
replacement. 
c. 
Items having been originally imported temporarily into Ethiopia 
for repair/maintenance provided the repair cost has been paid in 
foreign exchange. 
d. Goods exported by institutions or individual organizations who 
have scheduled programs to participate on exhibition/trade fair 
to be held abroad upon submission of; 
i. application 
letter 
confirming 
the 
place 
and 
town 
of 
exhibition/trade fair to be conducted; 
ii. the recommendation letter obtained from the pertinent 
government office(s) stating the value and quantity of goods to 
be exported; 
iii. Three copies of list of item stating, the quantity and value of the 
goods to be exported; 
iv. If the goods exported for the purpose of trade fair or exhibition 
are 
sold 
abroad 
or 
returned 
(partially/fully), 
the 
institution/individual shall submit the following documents for 
their undertaking settlement. 
v. A written undertaking is submitted by the applicant to repatriate 
proceeds if the goods are sold abroad or to return the goods.  
 
 
 
74 
vi. Report to National Bank for the return of goods fully or the 
repatriation of the value declared for goods sent to exhibition or 
trade fair by attaching the following documents:   
• Bank credit advice for the repatriation of foreign exchange of 
the sales proceeds (for sold items). 
• Custom declaration showing the re-entry of items sent for 
promotion or exhibition  
• Contractors who have taken up contractual agreements 
abroad to perform a task against foreign currency payments 
and who require to take with them instruments, vehicles and 
equipment provided they submit a guarantee or equivalent 
instrument which would secure the return of the property. 
• Authorized Banks are responsible to follow-up, the return of 
goods sent abroad on temporary export base, after 
accomplishment of task, and report to National Bank 
accordingly. 
 
1.8  Granting Provisional Export Permit 
 
1.8.1 National Bank shall issue procedure, as deemed necessary, for the type 
of goods to be transported temporarily and keep stock of the product 
in neighboring countries so that the export of the product may not be 
disrupted in the rainy season. 
1.8.2 Authorized Banks shall issue a provisional export permit and follow-up 
repatriation of export proceeds and report using standard format based 
 
1.9 Change of basis of shipment  
 
Approval of individual export applications under sales contract originally 
concluded on FOB basis shall be subject to the signing of an undertaking by 
the exporter to surrender to Authorized Banks the foreign exchange from 
payment of freight and /or insurance as the case may be in local currency in 
the event the basis of shipment subsequently amended to that of C&F and 
CIF 
 
1.10 Cancellation of Export Applications 
 
Approved export applications may be cancelled if shipment is not made within 
30 calendar days from the date of issue.  
 
 
 
 
75 
1.11 Settlement of Commitments  
 
a. Exporters are required to repatriate their export proceeds in foreign 
exchange within 90 days from the date of issue of export applications. 
However, National Bank may for good cause grant reasonable 
extension of time beyond 90 days. 
b. The National Bank will provide a list of delinquent exporters to all 
Authorized Banks. 
c. No Authorized Banks shall give an export permit to a prospective 
exporter whose name appears on the delinquent list. 
d. Any exporter whose names appear on the delinquent list shall first 
clear his/her outstanding commitments at the National Bank. Once he 
has cleared his commitments a clearance will be issued by the 
National Bank. 
e. Temporary clearance certificate may be issued by National Bank on 
case by case basis. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
76 
ANNEX TWO: IMPORT-RELATED REQUIREMENTS 
 
1. Import Authorization 
 
1.1 
Authorized Banks are mandated to allow import of goods for any value, 
against submission (including via electronic methods) of required 
documents by the importer. 
 
1.2 
Notwithstanding sub-article 1.1.1, any imports of goods that do not utilize 
foreign exchange resources from the banking system (and that do not 
consequently require the use of L/C, CAD, Advance payments, or other 
payment modalities) shall be permitted to enter the country subject to all 
the customary customs, tax, health, or other regulatory standards set by 
the relevant authorities. 
 
1.3 
Applicable Mode of Payment for Import 
 
Authorized banks shall use the under listed mode of payments for import 
of goods into the country: 
1.3.1 
Letter of credit at sight; 
1.3.2 Letter of credit on acceptance with prior approval of NBE 
1.3.3 Cash against document at sight; 
1.3.4 Cash against document on acceptance with prior approval of NBE 
and 
1.3.5 Advance payment. 
 
1.4 
Documents requirement and Payment Term Arrangements  
 
Authorized Banks shall allow Import of goods against submission of the 
following documents through the Electronic Single Window System, as 
applicable. The documentary requirements below may be waived by the 
National Bank on a case by case basis.  
 
1.4.1 
Imports by Letter of Credit (L/C)  
a. Import application form duly completed, signed & sealed and 
clearly showing HS codes, TIN number, Exchange rate and 
Importer account No. issued by National Bank; 
b. Pro-forma invoices showing clearly full description of goods, 
HS code including quantity, grade, quality, volume, 
measurement, weight, mode of shipment, terms of payment, 
 
 
 
77 
unit price and total amount of the goods to be paid at a named 
place of delivery; 
c. Valid trade licenses for foreign trade, investment or industry. 
d. Insurance certificate issued by local insurance company. 
However, in the case of donor/lender financed imports and 
import made from Non Resident Foreign currency accounts 
and foreign currency account of Foreign Direct Investors 
account this certificate may not be required. 
e. Certificate of competence from the pertinent government 
institution in order to prevent damage to public health, safety 
and the national economy as deemed necessary by the 
relevant authority. 
f. NBE’s prior approval letter in case of L/C on acceptance basis. 
g. Delinquent waiver letter from NBE  
 
1.4.2 Cash Against Document (CAD) at sight 
a. Authorized Banks shall approve purchase order for import of 
goods on Cash Against Documents (CAD) at sight basis upon 
fulfilling the following conditions and submission of 
documents: 
i. Purchase order, pro-forma invoice and valid trade licenses 
for foreign trade, investment or industry and local 
insurance certificate   
ii. Authorized Banks shall confirm that the importer is not on 
the delinquent list before approval of purchase order, or 
should have a waiver from delinquent letter from NBE.  
iii. Importers are required to obtain prior purchase order 
approval from Authorized Bank before shipment of goods; 
b. Authorized Banks shall issue import permit on Cash Against 
Documents (CAD) at sight basis upon receipt of shipment 
documents and submission of the following documents: 
i. Import application form duly completed, signed and 
sealed that clearly shows HS code and National Bank 
import account number; 
ii. the purchase order approved by the client bank or NBE’s 
approval letter in case of CAD acceptance;  
iii. Chamberized invoices; 
iv. Certificate of origin; 
v. Shipping documents 
vi. Packing list, if any. 
 
 
 
78 
 
1.4.3 Advance payment 
Authorized Banks shall issue import permit on advance payment 
basis upon fulfilling the following conditions and submission of 
documents: 
a. Importers who wish to import goods by advance payment are 
required to submit a letter of undertaking for the entry of the 
goods into the country in addition to the documents indicated 
under sub-article 1.3.1  above. 
b. The amount to be approved for advance payment from one 
supplier shall not exceed USD 5,000.00 (USD Five Thousand). 
In case of value exceeding USD 5,000.00 (USD Five 
Thousand), an importer should submit foreign bank guarantee 
confirmed by local Authorized Banks. 
c. Notwithstanding sub-article 1.3.3 (b) of this directive, Bank 
guarantee requirement is not applicable if transactions are to 
be debited from a non-resident accounts, except from 
retention account. 
d. NBE may provide special authorization to waive the above 
requirements under (b) and (c). 
 
1.5 
Other Requirements 
 
In addition to the provisions stipulated under the requirements above, the 
following are also required:- 
1.5.1 
Ministry of Health certificate if the import of goods are medicines 
and other related medical equipment; 
1.5.2 Ministry of Agriculture certificate for the import of agricultural 
chemical and veterinary medicines. 
1.5.3 Quality and Standard Authority Certificate for import of goods such 
as food, matches, nails, galvanized corrugated sheets, scales etc 
which require standardization. 
1.5.4 Road Transport Authority (Ethiopian Roads Authority) approval as 
per "Road Transport Regulation Proclamation No. 14/1992" Article 
7(3). 
1.5.5 Loan or grant agreement concluded between Government 
Agencies & foreign financing organizations and a letter from the 
Ministry of Finance (MOF) showing that the government agency is 
the user of the credit or/grant.  However, in the case of the private 
 
 
 
79 
sector, a letter of National Bank is required if the import is covered 
from external loan. 
1.5.6 Certificate of the pertinent government authority for the importation 
of explosives & security related instruments. 
1.5.7 Ethiopian Telecommunications Agency certificate for importation of 
radio communications equipment, fax machines, telephone 
apparatus, cell phones etc. 
1.5.8 Other goods for which a certificate of competence must be 
obtained from the pertinent government institution, in order to 
prevent damage to public health, safety and the national economy 
 
1.6 
Import destined to Inland dry port  
 
Document requirement and payment arrangement for Goods ordered to 
be stuffed in containers and/or RORO items and destined to "Inland Port" 
shall be processed as prescribed under Annex six of this directive.  
 
1.7 
Importation of used goods 
 
Authorized Banks shall avail foreign exchange for importation of used 
goods except for those on the customs negative list upon submission of 
the following documents in addition to the requirements stipulated under 
sub-article 1.3 : 
 
1.7.1 
Valid trade licenses for import, investment or industry, as the 
case may be; 
1.7.2 
Duly signed Pro-forma invoice from overseas suppliers showing 
full description of the goods including type, model and date of 
manufacture, FOB value and freight cost separately, terms of 
payment and validity date. 
1.7.3 
Chamberized documents showing full description of the goods 
including type, model, date of manufacture, and original 
purchase price from parties other than the seller. The FOB value 
of used vehicles, machineries, equipment’s, etc to be imported 
shall not exceed the maximum value indicated with respect of 
service year. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
80 
1.9 
Imports through Supplier’s Credit 
 
Authorized Bank shall, on the basis of approval of National Bank, allow 
eligible applicants to import goods under suppliers' credit in accordance 
with Article 17 of this Directive. 
 
1.10 
Imports through External loans 
 
Authorized Banks shall, on the basis of National Bank's directive 
governing external loans, allow eligible applicants to import goods in 
accordance with Article 17 of this Directive. 
 
1.11 
Imports by diplomatic bodies, other international organizations and 
their officials and NGO’s 
 
a. 
Imports for their own consumption by diplomatic and other 
international organizations of equal status and their officials may be 
paid by the debit of their Non-resident Foreign Currency Account 
b. Where they do not maintain Non-Resident Foreign Currency 
account they shall be treated in the same way as other importers. 
 
1.12 
Commodity Classification  
 
Authorized Banks shall give import permits on Harmonization system (HS) 
commodity classification bases for different categories of goods. 
 
1.13 
Ex-post Verification of Documents  
 
Authorized Banks shall ensure that all documents processed with regard 
to import transactions are kept in order so that National Bank can 
undertake ex-post verification of the documents in compliance with the 
existing trade and exchange regulations.  
 
1.14 
Actions to be taken before and after receipt of documents under 
L/C and CAD  
 
1.14.1 Upon arrival of goods but before receipt of documents 
Authorized Banks may facilitate in issuing delivery order to 
clear the goods against payments or other facilities at the 
 
 
 
81 
request of importers who wish to expedite the clearance of 
their goods. 
 
1.14.2 After arrival of documents 
a. Upon receipt of documents, the Authorized bank shall advice 
immediately to the customer about the receipt of documents and 
instruct to collect against payment (customer advice should be 
sent within five days from the date of receipt of documents) 
b. If the documents have not been collected the banks shall send a 
second reminder within fifteen days from the date of the first 
reminder and inform the client that the bank would be obliged to 
take the appropriate action unless there is response within five 
days. 
c. If the importer does not take up the documents within five days 
after the expiry of the 2nd reminder, banks shall send a final 
reminder informing the customer the seriousness of the issue and 
the implications on future dealing with banks. The bank advice 
should be sent to the National Bank. In the case of CAD, the bank 
shall send a final reminder informing the customer that it will 
return back the documents to the Remitter Bank unless the 
importer takes action within the next five days. 
d. Upon failure to pick up the documents after the last reminder is 
served, the Authorized bank should notify to the National Bank 
and the Customs Commission, stating the reluctance of the 
importer to collect the documents.  
e. After all the above steps have been taken and the documents 
remained uncollected for the goods that are consigned to the 
order of Authorized Banks and have lien on the documents 
received, the banks shall take appropriate action based on the 
financial interest it may have and legal ownership they possess.  
 
1.15 
Validity of Import Applications  
 
Import Applications: Import application shall be valid for 120 calendar 
days from the date of issue. The Authorized Bank may extend the validity, 
for good cause, by a maximum of 30 calendar days.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
82 
1.16 
Amendments of Import Applications 
 
Authorized Banks may for good cause amend import applications 
allowed at their end and report to National Bank. 
 
1.17 
Cancellation of Imports 
If a payment is not effected within the validity period of an import 
application, the associated permit shall be considered cancelled. 
1.17.1 Importers are required to submit evidence for the entry of goods 
into the country within 120 days from the date payment is effected.  
1.17.2 The National Bank will provide a list of non-delinquent importers 
to all Authorized Banks. No Authorized Banks shall give an import 
permit to a prospective importer whose name appears on the 
delinquent list. 
1.17.3 Any importer whose names appear on the delinquent list shall first 
clear his/her outstanding commitments at the National Bank. Once 
he has cleared his commitments a clearance certificate will be 
issued by the National Bank. However, temporary clearance may 
be issued by National Bank on case by case basis. 
 
 
 
83 
ANNEX THREE: SERVICES RELATED REQUIREMENTS 
 
Banks are authorized to effect all foreign service payments subject to the presentation 
of bona fide invoices and/or other supporting documents. The main categories of 
service payments and associated documentary requirements are listed below.   
 
1. 
Import Transit  
 
The transit and forwarding agents shall request for payment of such expenses on 
behalf of their customers by attaching the document specifying the item of goods 
delivered, including the transit charge payable. 
 
1.1 
Foreign Exchange to meet transit expenses incurred outside Ethiopia effected 
on C & F CFR, CPT, CIP and C.I.F. shall be availed provided that the 
application for foreign exchange is accompanied  
a. Application forms duly completed, signed and sealed, 
b. Transit invoice,  
c. Final supplier's invoice,  
d. Customs declaration except for payment request in advance for 
goods not entered into Ethiopia, 
e. Customs receipt, and 
f. Railway bill, truck manifest, and airway bill. 
 
2. Export Transit 
 
Authorized Banks shall allow foreign exchange for export transit to exporters upon 
submission of the following documents:- 
a. Application form duly completed 
b. Transit invoice 
c. Bill of lading, if exported on CFR, CPT, CIP and C.I.F basis 
d. Insurance policy or cover note, if exported on CIP & CIF basis; 
e. Original sales contract; 
f. Authorized Bank's credit advice. 
 
3. Import Freight   
 
3.1. Authorized banks shall open special foreign currency account in the name 
of Ethiopian Shipping and Logistic Service Enterprise (ESLSE) and deposit 
the freight amount in the account based on freight bill issued by ESLSE. 
 
 
 
84 
Authorized banks may also effect such import freight payments into ESLSE’s 
retention account. 
3.2. Authorized banks shall transfer the month end balance from the account to 
the foreign currency account of Ethiopian Shipping Lines held abroad on 
monthly basis. 
3.3. Authorized banks are required to submit a report detail of foreign authorized 
bank account of Ethiopian Shipping and logistic service enterprise such as 
name, account no. and foreign currency transfer amount within 10 days 
from the end of each month to National Bank. 
3.4. Authorized banks shall make foreign exchange available for freight expenses 
associated with goods imported in the form of donations. 
3.5. Authorized Banks shall allow foreign exchange for freight expense for import 
freight for carriers other than Ethiopian Shipping and logistic service 
enterprise, which is justified by adequate reasons, upon submission of the 
following documents. 
a. Application forms duly completed signed and sealed, 
b. Freight invoices, 
c. Supplier’s invoice, 
d. Bill of lading or airway bill 
e. Import permit. 
 
4. Export Freight 
 
Authorized Bank shall allow foreign exchange for export freight to exporters upon 
submission of the following documents:- 
i. Application form duly completed 
ii. Bill of lading 
iii. Freight invoices 
iv. Original sales contract 
v. Authorized Bank credit advice. 
 
5. Import-Related Other Charges 
 
Authorized Bank shall avail foreign exchange for imports to cover other charges 
such as port dues, port handling fee, storage and demurrage charges upon 
submission of the following documents. 
i. Letter of request duly completed, signed and sealed by the 
applicant. 
 
 
 
85 
ii. Invoice which state the purpose of payment. 
iii. Import permit 
iv. In case of demurrage charges, the documents indicated under 
sub-article i to iii above, and the "lay time calculation sheet" are 
required.  
 
6. Export-related other Charges 
 
Authorized Banks shall allow foreign exchange for exporters to cover super-
intendance or survey fee, demurrage charge upon submission of the following 
documents. 
i. An application form duly completed, signed and sealed  
ii. sales contract 
iii. Authorized Bank advice 
iv. Invoice 
In addition to the above quality certificate in case of quality claim, 
weight certificate in case of loss in weight, bill of lading in case of 
demurrage charges. 
 
7. Re-insurance Premium  
 
Authorized Banks shall avail foreign exchange to authorized insurance companies 
for payment of re-insurance premium upon submission of the following 
documents. 
i. a letter of request together with an agreement signed between 
the insurance company and the re-insurer in two copies, 
ii. insurance license approved by National Bank, 
iii. Debit note or statement of account, as the case may be. 
 
8. Foreigners Salary Remittances 
 
8.1 Salary Remittances by Foreign Employees 
 
Authorized Banks shall allow foreign exchange to a foreign employee for payment 
of net salary and benefits, as specified in the employment contract, upon 
submission of the following documents: 
a. Application form duly completed; 
b. Resident permit and Work permit; 
c. Valid contractual agreement  
 
 
 
86 
d. Confirmation letter from the employer which states the amount for 
every month’s salary and benefits transfer. 
e. In case of transferring arrears confirmation letter from the employer 
that the applicant didn’t transfer the salary for the months’ requested. 
 
8.2 The amount of salary remittance shall reflect net earnings as well as other 
specific benefits itemized in the employment contract such as pension 
contributions, bonus, accumulated leave pay, and the like that are to be 
included for remittance purposes. 
 
8.3 Exemptions: Foreign Employees of foreign Embassies, Legations, Consulates, 
E.C.A, A.U., U.N., etc., whose salaries are fully paid in foreign exchange from 
sources outside Ethiopia can take out and/or transfer their net earnings to 
extent of the balance in their Non-Resident foreign Currency Account. 
 
9. Medical Expenses 
 
a. 
Payments for medical services may be effected upon presentation of bona fide 
invoice from foreign medical provider, passport, valid entry visa, if applicable, 
and air ticket.  
b. Banks shall effect such transfers directly to the beneficiary medical provider 
based on the presented invoice. 
c. 
Additional foreign exchange may be approved to a patient being treated 
abroad provided his application is supported by a bona-fide medical bills or 
hospital accounts showing how the foreign exchange initially sold was 
expended. The application should be reviewed based on the medical 
certificate issued and signed by the attending foreign specialist or medical 
center, giving estimate of the medication fee that is needed in the immediate 
future. 
d. Patient who travel abroad on a chartered plane will not be required to submit 
air ticket instead a charter arrangement letter or receipt are proposed for 
acceptance. 
 
10. Educational Expenses 
 
1. Banks may provide foreign exchange for a bona-fide educational expenses 
including tuition fee and other associated educational expenses (room and 
board): 
i. 
Admission letter from learning institutions abroad evidencing that the 
student has been enrolled for the period claimed; 
 
 
 
87 
ii. 
In the case of a continuing student, evidence that the student is still enrolled 
and attending the institution and; 
iii. The relevant statement and letters from the educational institutions signed 
by the principal or the appropriate officer of the educational institution 
concerned that shows details of the various costs needed for a given 
academic period. 
2. Banks shall effect such transfers directly to the beneficiary education provider 
based on the presented invoice. 
3. In case of Distance Education Expenses, the payment shall be effected in the 
name of the concerned foreign institution by direct transfer subject to the 
presentation of the following documents. 
i. 
Admission letter from learning institution evidencing that the student has 
been enrolled for the period claimed. 
ii. 
In the case of a continuing student, evidence that the student is still enrolled 
and pursuing his studies through correspondence. 
iii. The relevant statement and letter from the educational institutions signed 
by the principal or top executive of the education institution concerned 
showing details of various costs involved, for a given academic period. 
4. Payments to recognized foreign learning institutions working in collaboration 
with locally accredited educational institutions.  
 
11. Other Service Payments 
 
Other service payments supported by bona-fide invoices shall also be effected by 
banks, including for example (and for removal of any doubt) the following items: 
 
a. Bona-fide seminar, workshop, symposium, conference, and training fees. 
Payment of same shall be made to institutions abroad through Authorized 
Banks. 
b. Membership contributions by government, international organizations and 
NGOs. 
c. Consultancy fee, commissioning, installation/erection fee, attendance and 
maintenance fee.  
d. Royalty and leasing fee. 
e. Film rental charges imported by licensed entities on a temporary importation 
basis. 
f. Area commissions for refueling jet oil-by-oil companies. 
g. Communications and other services payments such as telecom circuit 
charges, satellite service payments, postal service charges, TV and radio 
 
 
 
88 
channel service payments, including external television service and 
subscription fee.  
h. Aviation service payments and associated costs. 
i. Salary, allowances and administrative expenses of Ethiopian diplomatic 
missions abroad, Representatives of Ethiopian companies in other countries. 
j. Travel allowances for religious institutions and local NGOs. 
k. Cargo handling, freight and other associated costs like container service, port 
dues incurred on goods handled in transit by shipping and forwarding firms 
licensed to handle such service. 
l. Courier service payments and acceptable service charges in the event the 
outbound service exceeds inbound ones; 
m. Legal service, court charges and attorney fees payable in foreign currencies 
by organizations who are taking their cases at international court or arbitration 
tribunal. 
n. Payment for Items imported on duty-free basis or for trade fair and exhibition 
for temporary period when sold to a resident organizations or individual upon 
presentation of relevant documents. 
o. Re-conversion of a foreign exchange received fully or partially on confirmation 
of the recipient individual/organization justifying that the purposes under 
which the transfers are not partially or fully utilized. 
p. Fees for publications, periodicals, journals, books, membership fee, 
advertisement, examination fee, registration fee, admission fee, visa fee, if the 
Embassy not resident/located in Ethiopia etc. 
 
12. Documents Required for Service Payment 
 
i. 
An application form duly completed, signed and sealed and a letter stating 
the purpose of the payment for all transactions mentioned under article 11 of 
this Directive.  
ii. 
Invoice showing the nature of payment required and the amount due for 
payment with exception of transactions mentioned under Article 11 of this 
Directive. 
iii. 
If payments are for consultancy, service, professionals, etc, contractual 
agreement concluded between the parties, payment schedule or 
performance report and Ethiopian Customs Commission tax payment 
receipts if the agreement mentions about the payment of tax by the 
applicant. 
iv. 
If payments are for royalty and leasing fees, contract agreement.  
 
 
 
89 
v. 
Letter from pertinent government organization for establishment of branches 
of Ethiopian companies abroad for payments mentioned under sub-article 
11(i) of this Directive.  
vi. 
Payment for temporary entry of films, machinery and equipment temporarily 
imported in the country in the case of transaction mentioned under sub-
article 11(d )and (n) of this Directive. 
vii. 
Valid transit and forwarding license in the case of transaction mentioned 
under sub-article 11 (k) of this Directive. 
viii. 
In the case of courier service payment: 
a. 
Agency agreement concluded between the foreign postal delivery 
Courier Company and local agent. 
b. 
Valid license from Ministry of Trade or the appropriate government 
authority. 
c. 
List of services provided for outgoing and incoming deliveries showing 
the amount of revenue realized on a monthly basis and attested by 
certified external auditors. 
d. 
Terms and tariffs for outgoing and incoming shipments as well as the 
appropriation of revenues between the foreign courier company and 
the agents. 
e. 
Invoice or claim letter from the counterpart expecting the payment 
 
13. Validity of service payment Permit 
 
The permit is valid for payment of 30 calendar days only and may extend for good 
cause for 10 days 
 
14. Freight Expenses for Foreign Nationals 
 
14.1. Approval of Foreign Exchange by Authorized Banks to Cover Truck 
Freight Expenses 
 
Authorized Banks shall avail foreign exchange to cover freight expenses for 
goods transported by trucks owned by foreign nationals to and from 
neighboring countries upon submission of the following documents by 
licensed Transit and Forwarding Agents in Ethiopia. 
 
a. For Imports 
i. Import transit and freight expenses application forms duly completed 
signed and sealed. 
ii. Import permit issued by Authorized Banks. 
 
 
 
90 
iii. Truck Way Bill 
iv. Supplier’s invoice 
v. Customs Declaration or Notice of Goods Arrival 
vi. Original Truck voyage permit issued by the pertinent government 
authority. 
vii. Document evidencing neighboring countries foreign Nationality of 
the Truck owner 
 
b. For Exports 
i. Export permit issued by Authorized Banks and 
ii. Export transit and freight expenses application forms duly completed 
signed and sealed. 
iii. Customs declaration or notice of goods departure. 
iv. Original invoice issued by transit and forwarding agents in Ethiopia. 
v. Truck Way Bill. 
vi. Truck voyage permit issued by the pertinent government authority. 
vii. Document evidencing neighboring countries foreign Nationality of 
the Truck owner. 
 
15. Treatment of Foreign Airlines Transactions  
 
15.1 Sale of Air Tickets to Residents and Non-Residents 
 
15.1.1 Air carriers of foreign countries operating in Ethiopia may sell 
passenger and/or cargo air tickets to Ethiopians or to foreign 
nationals (be it residents or non-residents) and may also transfer 
funds generated from the sales, provided they satisfy 
requirements set hereunder. 
15.1.2 Foreign airlines and their agents shall get a license from National 
Bank to collect foreign currency cash notes and credit/debit card 
payments from passenger or cargo sales. 
15.1.3 Foreign airlines shall open special foreign currency account which 
can only be used to deposit foreign currency collected from air 
ticket sales. Foreign currency from this account can be 
transferred upon fulfillment of the necessary requirements as 
specified under sub-article 15.2 of this directive. 
 
 
 
 
 
91 
15.2  Condition of Sale of Tickets to Resident Foreigners  
 
Foreign carriers’ representatives’ office may sell air tickets to resident 
foreigners in Birr when the latter declares that their earnings are in local 
currency.  The declaration of such earnings shall be supported by one or a 
combination of the following documents. 
1. Valid resident permits or I.D card for foreign nationals of 
Ethiopian origin. 
2. Valid trading licenses (if engaged in business). 
3. Valid employment letters or acceptable identification 
cards. 
4. Resident foreigners with a diplomatic status or in similar 
categories who maintain (NR) Non-Resident accounts 
shall pay in checks drawn on Non-Resident Foreign 
Currency Accounts. 
 
15.3 Sale of Tickets to Non-Resident Foreigners 
 
Foreign carriers may also sell tickets to non-residents, but only in foreign 
exchange or upon the presentation to the airlines of lawfully exchanged 
receipts of amounts at least equal to the maintenance and cost of tickets 
from authorized banks, or against the debit of a non-resident account if 
the holder of the account may deem necessary to buy the ticket. 
 
15.4 Air Tickets Credit Sales 
 
Where sales are made on credit by foreign airlines or their agent, the 
proceeds from the credit of sales, for purposes of transfer, shall be 
declared and reported only at the time of collection of the proceeds. 
 
15.5  Sales of Prepaid Ticket Advices (PTAs) 
 
15.5.1 Air tickets may be sold in advance to nationals residing abroad 
through their family or sponsors who intend to invite or bring 
friends or family member to come home or having an urging need 
and circumstances like termination of job, acquitting studies, 
health reasons for continued research. 
 
 
 
 
92 
15.5.2 Based on the approval issued, foreign airlines or their agents may 
issue PTAs in advance to Ethiopian and resident foreigners or to 
the following general categories. 
i. Students of Ethiopian nationality studying abroad (whether 
purchases are requested by parents, relatives or the students 
themselves). 
ii. Nationals who went abroad on medical grounds and whose 
valid tickets expire due to prolonged stays. 
iii. Nationals residing abroad who are dependents on others and 
can’t afford to purchase air tickets in forex, for example: maids, 
housewives, refugees or other dependents or those subsisting 
on odd jobs, etc. 
iv. Foreigners who are residents and are described based on sub-
article iii above with earnings in birr and whose children study 
abroad and where parents or close relatives request purchases 
of tickets for homecoming. 
v. Resident businessmen, whether nationals or foreigners with 
earnings in the local currency, who may be interested to invite 
partners, affiliates or business counter parts and who want to 
purchase air tickets or book hotels for their incoming guests. 
vi. All applications for PTAs shall be supported by valid 
documentary evidences or sufficient justifications to cover the 
requests. 
vii. Supporting documents should be attached for sales or PTAs 
while lodging the transfer application. 
 
 
15.6  Issuance of Virtual Multiple Purpose Document (VMPD) 
 
15.6.1 VMPD are special coupons issued to cover collections for such 
services as listed below, whose sales shall be considered along with 
air ticket proceeds for remittance provided that it is collected in 
foreign currency only and is evidenced by: 
a. Air or surface transportation. 
b. Excess-baggage charges (whether rated as baggage or 
cargo). 
c. Land arrangements for ITS (where IT means inclusive tours). 
d. Car hires. 
e. Extra fares. 
 
 
 
93 
f. Charges collected for services for incapacitated passengers 
(oxygen, ambulance, special equipment, etc.). 
g. Hotel accommodation. 
h. Collection for PTAs. 
i. Collection of sundry, charges, e.g., routing charge etc. 
15.6.2 VMPD are either specified or unspecified: 
a. Specified VMPD are issued for specified air, surface, sea, rail, 
bus, or ground transportation of passengers when the 
following conditions are complied. 
1. 
When it is drawn on a specified carrier, tour operator. 
2. If it is limited to one type of service (air, rail, or bus). 
3. When it is drawn on a PTA on a specific carrier or service. 
b. Unspecified VMPD (miscellaneous charge order) are 
considered to have been issued for unspecified 
transportation or other services if issued for purposes other 
than specified transportation or service. 
 
15.6.3 VMPD may be issued to cover collections for: 
a. Specified transportation and/or land arrangements of a 
specified IT not to exceed the value of the transportation 
and/or land arrangements. 
b. Unspecified transportation and other services must not 
exceed USD 350.00 (USD three hundred fifty) or the 
equivalent at the authorized bank’s selling rate at the time of 
issuance or re-issuance of the VMPD. 
 
15.7  Air Freight Charges Payable in Forex 
 
Foreign airlines or their agents shall accept shipment of goods or 
conveyance of cargo for exports on FOB basis, or freight prepaid basis as 
the case may be on the contract of sale of goods concluded between the 
buyer and seller. 
 
15.8  Authorized bank Permits References 
 
Foreign airlines or their agents shall quote the corresponding Authorized 
Bank export permit numbers and the name of exporter on the airway bills 
for all exports and the issuing Authorized Bank may issue an additional 
permit for the purpose of transferring the freight amount involved. 
 
 
 
 
 
94 
15.9  Amendment of Shipping Terms 
 
Prior to obtaining approval from issuing authorized bank, any amendment 
of shipping terms from FOB to C & F, CIF etc. is prohibited. Airline offices 
shall strictly stick to the mode of delivery stated under export permit and 
collect their freight charges accordingly. 
 
15.10 
Sales Through Agents 
 
15.10.1 If sales are made through agents, the discounts currently applied 
on passenger and cargo sales shall respectively be deducted as 
service charges from the sales returns of air tickets. 
15.10.2 
Foreign airlines, in their capacity as principals, shall check the 
authenticity of transactions concluded by their agents throughout 
the process of sales of air tickets. 
 
15.11 Documents Requires 
 
Resident foreign airlines shall keep their sales statements duly audited by 
licensed accountants or external auditors who must ascertain that such 
statements are in accordance with the existing Foreign Exchange laws and 
that all collections were made as prescribed by this Directive. 
 
15.12 
Sales Statements 
 
 
Sales statements shall consist of: 
 
15.12.1 
A separate report of normal sales and PTA sales separately and 
then the total turnover on monthly basis; a report of expenses 
of each class of sales and then total expenses within the same 
period; 
15.12.2 A report of refunds made within the same period; 
15.12.3 A report of the discounts given to agents on sales of tickets 
within the period, for which the application covers; and 
15.12.4 A summary of sales and expenses statements and the resulting 
net remittable amounts, after deducting all administrative and 
other local expenses expected. 
 
 
 
 
 
95 
15.13 
Appointment of External Auditors by Foreign Airlines 
 
Foreign Airlines shall be allowed to appoint external auditors for 
ensuring correctness of their financial statements pertinent to their 
tickets sales revenues and expenses. 
 
15.13.1 
The Authorized Bank shall effect the transfer of 100% of excess 
sales in advance based on audited statements and sales summary 
report provided by the foreign airlines. 
15.13.2 
Any discrepancy detected in the process of verification by the 
Authorized Bank shall be notified to the foreign airline and 
deducted automatically from the next remittances requested, until 
such time the discrepancies are justified for transfer. 
15.13.3 
Foreign airlines shall ensure that tour operators, travel or 
commission agents, packing and forwarding agents comply with 
this Directive, pay ticket price or freight charge in foreign 
exchange as may be appropriate and any item of goods 
dispatched through forwarding agents using foreign airline carrier 
should have permits issued by Authorized Banks. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
96 
ANNEX FOUR: BANK-AFFILIATED FOREIGN EXCHANGE BUREAU OPERATIONS  
 
1.  Conditions for issuance of Forex Bureau License 
 
National Bank shall issue forex bureau license for the Authorized Bank if it fulfills 
the following requirements:- 
 
1. Suitable premise in all respects to carry on the business of a forex bureau 
and that meets safety and security standards set out by the Authorized 
bank; 
2. Name plate indicating the physical address of the forex bureau(x); 
3. Necessary device/equipment to detect counterfeit notes 
4. Provide list of names and designations of the forex bureau staff; and 
5. Ensure that the staffs of the forex bureau are people of integrity, credibility 
and competence, with no record of fraud, dishonesty,  and corruption;  
 
2. Security Requirements 
 
Forex bureaus shall have the responsibility to meet the following security 
requirements; 
 
1. A forex bureau shall be situated in a separate and secure place of business 
but accessible to customers. 
2. A forex bureau situated outside the premises of the Authorized Bank must 
have: 
a. a security arrangement strong enough to properly protect its premise, 
staff and property; 
b. use of CCTV camera monitoring systems; 
c. fire extinguishers installed at vantage points within the premises; 
d. A fireproof safe/vault under the control of more than one person. 
e. The duplicate keys should be stored off the premise.   
 
3. Requirements for Processing Details Using Computer 
 
      A forex bureau must ensure that:- 
 
1. proper controls are built into the system to eliminate the occurrence of 
irregularities which would adversely affect data processing; 
2. adequate back-up system;  
3. all inputs in the system are properly checked on daily basis; and 
 
 
 
97 
4. Access to the system is restricted only to authorized personnel. 
 
4. Nomenclature 
 
       A forex bureau must observe the following with its nomenclature. 
 
1. A forex bureau shall bear the name of the Authorized Bank where it is 
situated in the same premise or in a branch thereof. 
2. A forex bureau shall have a name of its own when situated outside the 
premises of the Authorized Bank’s head office or its branches. 
 
5. Obligations of Staff 
 
Forex bureau staff shall have the following obligations. 
1. All staff members shall sign a letter pledging not to disclose any confidential 
information revealed to them in connection with the forex bureau or its 
customers to third party. 
2. All staff members of a forex bureau shall be bound to strictly adhere to a 
code of conduct, which must be prepared by the authorized bank. 
3. Neither the staff of a forex bureau nor the Authorized Bank shall disclose 
information to any person other than in the discharge of their duties and 
through official channels, duties or otherwise, unless such information is 
generally known. 
 
6. Forex Bureau Transactions 
 
A forex bureau shall conduct its transactions as follows. 
 
1. A forex bureau shall engage in the buying and selling of major convertible 
currencies on the basis of freely negotiated rates with its customers.   
2. A forex bureau shall engage in spot transactions only, with immediate 
delivery of currencies bought or sold. 
3. All forex bureau are required to sell and/or buy cash notes at displayed 
exchange rates before any subsequent change. 
4. All foreign exchange buying and selling transactions by a forex bureau shall 
be done using forms authorized by the National Bank. 
5. All forex bureau shall exercise every care to check the authenticity of 
currencies they buy and use counterfeit detecting machines when 
exchanging foreign currency cash notes. 
 
 
 
 
98 
7. Determination of Exchange Rates 
A forex bureau shall determine the applicable exchange rate for its transactions 
based on freely negotiated rates and shall post the applicable rates at its premises 
for its clients.  
 
8. Displaying Exchange Rates and  
       A forex bureau shall display in a prominent manner:- 
 
1. its buying and selling rates for cash notes; 
2. business hours, a forex bureau can establish its service hours based on 
the customer requirements and appropriateness to the business; 
3. post a notice to the effect that all customers are entitled to get a receipt 
for all transactions to proof the legality of exchange. 
 
9. Authority to Sell Foreign Exchange 
The National Bank shall issue licenses for Authorized Banks to effect through their 
forex bureau sales of foreign currency for services specified hereunder. 
 
9.1. Personal Travel Forex Sales 
 
A Forex Bureau may sell foreign exchange for a personal travel outside Ethiopia, 
(such as holiday, education, medical, and other personal reasons) to an individual 
Ethiopian national or a foreign resident upon presentation of passport, valid entry 
visa, if applicable, and air ticket.  
 
1. Travelers are entitled to USD 5,000 (Five-thousand USD) or its equivalent 
in other convertible currencies, which may be provided as cash notes or via 
a debit card.  
2. For FCY Account holders, up to USD 10,000 (Ten-thousand USD) or its 
equivalent in other convertible currencies, may be taken in cash notes or via 
a debit card. In addition, the accountholder can take up to 10% of their 
outstanding FCY Account balance via a debit card.  
3. Unless otherwise authorized by the NBE, any Ethiopian resident may not 
carry cash notes more than USD 10,000 (Ten-thousand USD) or equivalent 
per travel. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
99 
9.2. Business Travel Allowance 
 
1. A Forex Bureau may sell foreign exchange for a bona-fide business travel to 
representatives of business organization, upon presentation of valid licenses 
together with passport, if applicable, and air ticket.  
2. A Forex Bureau may also sell foreign exchange for a bona-fide business 
travel to business associations, welfare institutions, and religious 
associations, organizers of trade exhibitions, tourism, cultural show and 
sports. 
3. For Government travelers as per the Council of Ministers Directive in relation 
to Government Institutions per diem, accommodation and other related 
expenses. However, the total cash notes shall not exceed USD 10,000.00 
(USD ten thousand) or in equivalent other convertible currencies, which may 
be provided as cash notes or via a debit card.  
4. For FCY Account holders, up to USD 10,000 (Ten-thousand USD) or its 
equivalent in other convertible currencies may be taken in cash notes or via 
a debit card. In addition, the accountholder can take up to 10% of their 
outstanding FCY Account balance via a debit card. 
5. Withdrawals of cash notes for the purpose of convening conferences, 
workshops, meeting and per-diem payments by Embassies, International 
Organizations and regional organization can be released based on the 
request submitted and requirements of the program to be carried out. 
6. If the trip is arranged by chartered plane, amount approved shall be on the 
basis of the related documents presented for the trip and charter 
arrangement to an airline. 
7. Travelers who are going to neighboring countries using their own transport 
means or surface transport in lieu of air ticket may be accepted to purchase 
foreign currency upon presentation of car passage certificate or letter from 
the concerned government organization or companies. 
8. Unless otherwise authorized by the NBE, any Ethiopian resident may not 
carry cash notes more than USD 10,000 (Ten-thousand) or equivalent per 
Business travel. 
 
10. 
Reconversion of Birr into Foreign Currency 
 
A Forex Bureau may reconvert Birr into Foreign currency for non-resident 
foreigners and tourists: 
 
a. 
Up to USD 500 (USD five hundred) without evidence, upon presentation 
of passport, valid visa, and air ticket. 
 
 
 
100 
b. In excess of USD 500 (USD five hundred) with the presentation of 
passport, valid visa, air ticket and authenticated bank advice indicating 
that equivalent amount of foreign exchange is lawfully converted into 
local currency.  
c. 
For purposes of Immigration related payments, resident foreigners, non-
resident foreigners and tourists may convert Birr of up to the required 
Immigration fees upon presentation of supporting documents.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
101 
ANNEX FIVE:  INDEPENDENT FOREIGN EXCHANGE BUREAU OPERATIONS 
 
1.  General 
 
1.1 The National Bank shall license Independent Foreign Exchange Bureaus that operate 
as separate businesses without any bank affiliation. 
1.2 Such foreign exchange bureaus shall be referred to as “Independent Foreign 
Exchange Bureaus” (or “Independent Forex Bureaus”) as opposed to the “Bank-
affiliated Foreign Exchange Bureau” that have so far been in operation as sub-units or 
windows of banks.  
1.3 Independent Foreign Exchange Bureau are to engage solely in the business of buying 
and selling foreign exchange cash notes and are not to engage in any other area of 
banking activity. 
 
2. Conditions for issuance of Forex Bureau License 
 
National Bank shall issue an “Independent Forex Bureau License” for a legally 
established business entity that fulfils the following requirements:  
 
2.1 An established business entity, set up in whatever legal form, that is owned by an 
Ethiopian national, Non-Resident Ethiopian, and/or Foreign Citizen of Ethiopian 
Origin; 
2.2 Fulfills the minimum capital requirement of Birr 15 million and is able to provide a 
Security Deposit of Birr 30 million to be placed in a blocked account (which can be 
interest-earning) at any bank; 
2.3 The face value of the Security Deposit shall be released after two years of continued 
service by the Independent Forex Bureau.  
2.4 Suitable premise in all respects to carry on the business of a forex bureau and that 
meets safety and security standards set out by NBE for bank-based foreign exchange 
bureaus; 
2.5 Name plate indicating the physical address of the forex bureau(x); 
2.6 Necessary device/equipment to detect counterfeit notes 
2.7 Provide list of names and designations of the forex bureau staff;  
2.8 Ensure that the staffs of the forex bureau are people of integrity, credibility and 
competence, with no record of fraud, dishonesty, and corruption; and 
2.9 Ensure that sufficient insurance is procured to fully cover the maximum cash holdings 
that will be at the forex bureau site at any given time.  
 
 
 
 
102 
3. Other conditions and requirements 
 
3.1 
Independent Foreign Exchange Bureaus shall adhere to all other 
requirements governing bank-based forex bureau, including with respect to 
security requirements, operational procedures and obligations, as well as 
reporting requirements. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
103 
ANNEX SIX: DRY PORT IMPORT AND EXPORT PROCEDURES  
 
1. 
Imports 
 
 
1.1  Imports by Letter of Credit 
 
 
1.1.1.  Documents Required 
 
 
 
The required documents to be submitted by an importer under L/C are: 
 
a. Import application from duly completed, signed, sealed and clearly 
showing NBE importer number, HS codes, TIN No. 
b. Proforma invoices showing clearly full description of goods, HS code 
including quantity, grade, quality, volume, measurement, weight, 
mode of shipment, terms of payment, unit price and total amount of 
the goods to be paid at a named place of delivery. 
c. Valid license for foreign trade, investment or industry, or exemption 
letter from pertinent government authority.  
d. Insurance certificate issued by local insurance company. 
e. Settled outstanding commitment confirmation if the name appears 
on delinquent list maintained and reported by the National Bank. 
f. Goods ordered against payment of foreign exchange and are to be 
stuffed in containers and/or RORO items can be destined to “Inland 
Port”.  The proforma invoices submitted by importers to banks 
seeking payment arrangements to place the order of goods at dry 
port should specifically state the named Inland Port in Ethiopia as the 
final destinations have to be incorporated in the L/C instrument. 
g. In establishing the letter of credits, banks shall require supplier to 
ship the goods under an arrangement of conveyance through Bill of 
Loading.  The delivery condition must indicate the Inland Port in 
Ethiopia as a final destination with multi-modal transport documents 
acceptable.  The issuer of the Bill of Loading or acting as agent of 
the carrier will be responsible for the goods transported through out 
the voyage and for the delivery of the goods at the specified place. 
h. In the even where the goods are to be delivered against payment 
terms on FOB basis, the carriers shall arrange for direct transit of the 
goods to the final destination.  i.e. up to the Inland Port named.  This 
instruction shall clearly be stipulated as one of the L/C essential 
conditions calling for the performances. 
 
 
 
104 
i. If the contract/purchase agreement is on CIP or CPT basis, the terms 
of payment applicable and documents to be presented shall be 
determined by taking into account the followings points: 
j. The condition of payment agreed 
k. Partial payment can be allowed depending on the arrangement of 
the delivery of the goods at the final destination and the availability 
of documents implying to the delivery of the items shipped. 
l. If the purchase agreement calls for delivery of goods at a Dry Port 
for containerized goods and RORO items (vehicles) is a mandatory 
requirement for the lists provided to banks upon receipt of written 
instruction from the relevant government organization all payment 
arrangements and documentations must be structured in such a way 
to ensure that goods ordered are delivered at the Inland Port and/or 
Customs Warehouse in Ethiopia. 
 
1.1.2 Payment Term Arrangements and Documentation Required for 
Goods Destined at the Inland Port or Customs Warehouse 
 
For good purchased under FOB, CPT or CIP terms of payment and 
delivered at a named dry port, withdrawals or payments can be 
arranged as follows, using the L/C as mode of payment: 
 
a. Chamberized invoices 
b. Certificate of origin. 
c. Multi-modal/Combined transport document 
d. Multi-modal/Combined transport documents and Carrier/freight 
invoice which indicates the actual freight charges paid covering 
ocean, inland transport and other related charges up to the 
named dry port in the case of CPT and CIP terms. 
e. Packing list if any. 
f. Partial payments may be effected if the condition of payment and 
shipment terms allows and the required documents stated above 
from (a)-(e) are presented. 
g. For delivery of the goods arranged on FOB basis, the foreign port 
charges through which the cargo passes freight to the inland 
point and the related expenses for deliver up to the Inland Port 
shall be paid to the Multi-modal Transport Operator in Birr.  
However, if the goods are delivered by foreign vessels and trucks 
to the inland port through an agent who is involved in the delivery 
of the goods and have the responsibility of transiting the cargos 
 
 
 
105 
to the Inland Port stated, the related freight charge and transit 
expenses required in moving the consignment up to the named 
place shall be paid in foreign exchange and shall be treated on 
the basis of this Directive. 
h. If the term of agreement is on CPT and CIP terms of deliver the 
goods up to the dry port named, the Multi-modal Transport 
Operator shall have the responsibility to arrange the dispatch of 
the goods the logistics pertaining to the transit service and 
delivery of goods at the Inland Port or Customs Warehouse in 
Ethiopia.  The L/C should state the terms of payment and the 
documents to be produced requirements. 
 
 
1.2 
Imports by Cash Against Documents (CAD) at sight 
 
1.2.1 Importers who wish to import goods on Cash Against Documents 
are required to obtain a prior approval from banks before ordering 
goods for shipment and fulfill the following conditions: 
 
a. Produce documents such as purchase order, proforma invoice 
and valid trade licenses for foreign trade, investment or industry 
and one copy or local insurance certificate to the bank. 
b. Settle outstanding commitment confirmation if the name appears 
on delinquent list reported by NBE. 
c. Purchase Order (PO) presented for prior approval by importers, 
among others the details should clearly state the name of sea port 
through which the cargo passes and the final place of delivery at 
inland port (Dry Port), that is applicable to containerized and 
RORO goods. 
d. Purchase Orders approved should be sent to NBE along with 
other returns dispatched. 
e. A Purchase Order (PO) sent to a supplier should clearly state the 
requirements for delivery of documents through banks only. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
106 
1.2.1 Import Payments Process on CAD Basis 
 
1.2.2.1 To process import applications, upon shipment of the 
goods by the sellers and receipt of documents by banks, 
importers are required to submit the following documents. 
 
 
a. Import application form duly completed signed and 
sealed that clearly show NBE’s importer account 
number and HS code number. 
b. The purchase order approved by the client bank. 
c. Copies of chamberized invoices. 
d. Copies of certificate or origin. 
e. Multi-modal/combined transport document that 
indicates the ultimate destination and delivery point 
stating the name of the dry port and carrier/freight 
invoice if prepaid. 
f. Packing list, if any. 
 
1.2.2.1 Payment for imports on CAD basis shall be released when:- 
 
a. the importer present the approved purchase order 
prior to sending shipping orders and  
b. Fulfilled and presented as per the instruction of 
remitting bank 
 
 
1.3 
List of Inland Port and Sea Ports Accessible 
 
 
 1.3.1 
Inland Port 
a. Modjo Branch Customs Warehouse, Modjo. 
b. Semera Customs Warehouse, Semera. 
c. Others as may be designated by Dry Port Service 
Enterprise. 
 
 
 1.3.2. Sea Port 
 
 
 
 
For the purpose of this Directive the seaport that services the 
outgoing and incoming cargos is the port of Djibouti and others 
designated as eligible ports by the pertinent authority.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
107 
2. Exports 
 
 
2.1 
Exports by Letter of Credit 
 
2.1.1. Documents required 
 
 
 
 
 
Banks shall allow exports for goods to be exported abroad 
against submission of the following documents. 
a. Valid foreign trade license for export 
b. Authenticated L/C 
c. Customs Declaration duly completed, signed and sealed  
d. Banks declarations duly completed, signed and sealed. 
e. Invoices duly completed. 
f. Sales contract. 
g. Waiver from NBE if exporter is delinquent.  
 
2.1.2. Exports Delivered at Ex Works (EXW) 
 
a. Exporters may agree for sales and delivery of goods at a price 
calculated on the basis of costs at Ex-Factory or at Inland Dry 
Port named where the buyer preferred the purchase point to be 
fixed.  The contract agreement should clearly state the place of 
delivery and the terms of payment and price to be paid. 
b. Exporters shall be responsible for the repatriation of the foreign 
exchange based on the sales agreement and documentation 
established as per the mode of payment agreed.  The payment 
of inland freight to the port and transit expenses will be subject 
to the delivery terms and agreed sales point. 
c. Banks shall issue export permits and register the sales contracts 
taking into account the delivery terms to take place at one of the 
different sale points as stated under (a) and on the strength of 
instrument of payments that can be made available. 
 
2.1.3. Documentation Required for Delivery of Export Goods at Ex Works 
 
 
Notwithstanding all other documentation required which are subject 
for presentation in the usual manner as stated under 5.1.1, in 
multimodal transport document issued by vessel owners or agents, 
exporters shall indicate the center or dispatch point and final 
destination including the port where the goods are to be loaded on 
 
 
 
108 
board a vessel to substantiate full compliance and adherence to this 
Directive. If necessary, it should also include the route and voyage 
that it passes through. 
 
3. Exports under Advance Payments 
 
Exporters who wish to obtain export application under advance payments are 
required to submit the documents indicated under items sub-article 2.1.1 a, c, 
d, e, f and g, sub-article 2.1.3 and bank transfer advices. 
 
4. Directive for Implementation 
 
 
All banks are hereby required to process import and export applications which 
are to be delivered in a containerized packing system and incoming RORO 
items by taking the specific inland port of the choice of their customers.  
Accordingly, it is necessary that banks incorporate the system of delivery and 
documentation by synchronizing the related payment mechanisms in 
accordance with the issued amendments for making the delivery of import 
and export goods at the named Inland Port in Ethiopia. 
 
 
 
 
 
