‘

Peoonnn”,
Peoennll%

90000000 9FF LLY
900008 80IT iy, t
9088aaat tll iin, t
eases gn, %%
aaasstttigen,*,
9aasssttly ”, th a
aaa,
uma
Popes iHllfiitiy ta 0 ass
raat “ie

asst tlinytthay

COMTI

iy

sa
2 88 vayy

.

e e

eee eteteay,
eee ee eevee,

L)

@eeoee Gee eon,

~ 2 2 BB Bmamwmwwewes

D
D

OPERATING GUIDELINE FOR THE OPEN

‘

D

MARKET OPERATIONS AND STANDING : |,

FACILITIES

GUIDELINE NO. MFAD /OMO&SFs /001/2024)

xt
a
—
NX
>
wel
=)
=

PATRAS

nbe.gov.et

Nddde-k V7

NATIONAL BANK
OF ETHIOPIA
PATERE Mek VI

1. INTRODUCTION

National Bank of Ethiopia has issued directive ‘MFAD/OMO&SFs/001/2021’ on Open
Market Operation (OMO) and Standing Facilities (SFs) as instruments for effective
management of liquidity in the financial system for the purposes of conducting monetary
policy.

Therefore, this document provides the operating guiding procedure to the OMO and SFs and
should be read in conjunction with the Open Market Operation and Standing Facilities
Directive MFAD/OMO&SFs/001/2021.

2. ELIGIBILITY

a) All Banks that maintain reserve requirement with National Bank are eligible to access
the standing facilities and participate in open market operation.

b) To be eligible, each bank shall enter into an agreement with the National Bank of
Ethiopia in respect of Appendix-I (Open Market Operation and Standing
Facilities Directive Agreement) through Monetary and Financial Analysis
Directorate (MFAD).

3. INTRADAY LENDING FACILITY (ILF)
3.1 Access to Facility

a) Participants can request intraday lending facility (ILF) and submit their application
form to Payment System and Settlement Directorate (PSSD) via email
(be coe. cos cl), The submission form is attached in Appendix A).

b) If ILF application request was sent via email, participants should confirm
application status by telephone to the PSSD on (011-517-54-52)

c) In the case where participants are unable to submit application via email, physical
delivery of application may be submitted directly to the PSSD, but still within the
application time period.

d) Application time for ILF is from 9:00 AM to 3:30 PM on all business days
(Monday to Friday) with the exception of national holidays.

e) ILF request will not be accepted or initiated if the participant has no sufficient
collateral during the request time.

3.2 Term and Conditions
3.2.1 Interest
a) The intra-day lending facility shall be free of charge.
3.2.2 Collateral

a) Assets eligible as collateral shall meet all the required conditions stated in OMO &
SFs Directive Article 6, sub-article (1).

b) The remaining days to maturity of eligible assets shall be more than two days.

c) The value of eligible assets provided as collateral shall fully cover the loan granted
plus a haircut. The haircut rates can be found on the NBE website. Za .

NY

~nbe.gov.et

PALTERE Dek

3.2.3 Settlement

a)

If the ILF application request is successfully validated, EATS receives the request
to increase the cash borrowing participants’ account balance, an operation that has
no business reason to fail in EATS.

3.2.4 Payment Upon Maturity

a)

Intraday loan shall be paid on the same business day (repaid at or before 4:00 PM
of the same day).

3.2.5 Conversion of Intraday Loans

a)

b)

c)

d)

In case, where the ILF is not paid, ILF should be converted to standing lending
facility.

The Corporate Finance Directorate (CFD) shall convert the Intraday Loan Facility
into Standing Lending Facility prior to final cut off time of the EATS without prior
notice to the participant.

When the Intraday Lending Facility is converted into Standing Lending Facility,
the terms and conditions for Standing Lending Facility shall apply thereafter.

After the conversion of ILF to SLF, the CFD will inform the participant about the
loan status in the next business day until 9:00 AM through email.

4. STANDING LENDING FACILITY (SLF)
4.1 Access to Facility

a)

b)

c)

d)

¢)

Participants can request Standing Lending Facility (SLF) and submit their
application form to CFD via email at ()005))/ 0.00. 01). The submission form
is attached in Appendix B).

If SLF application request was sent via email, participants should confirm
application status by telephone to the CFD on (011-517-54-13).

In the case where participants are unable to submit application via email, physical
delivery of application may be submitted directly to the CFD, but still within the
application time period.

Application time for Standing Lending Facility is set at 3:30 PM—4:30 PM on all
business days (Monday to Friday) with the exception of national holidays.

Any SLF request sent into CFD without sufficient collateral cover will be rejected
at cut-off time and cannot be re-submitted for that day as stated in Article 4.2.

If SLF request is rejected, the CFD will notify the requesting commercial bank on
the same day and provides the reason (s) of the rejection through an email and/or
telephone.

4.2 Term and Conditions
4.2.1 Interest
a) The Standing Lending Facility rate shall be announced in advance on the National

Bank’s website via Monetary and Financial Analysis Directorate (MFAD).

b) Revisions to the rate shall be announced aligned to the NBE Boal _Mmeetings

following decision on the monetary policy stance.

nbe.gov.et

PATERE Ahek VI

4.2.2 Time Frame

a) The maturity of the Standing Lending Facility shall be overnight (repaid at or
before 10:00 AM of the next business day).

4.2.3 Collateral

a) Assets eligible as collateral shall meet all the required conditions stated in OMO
& SFs Directive Article 6, sub-article (1).

b) The remaining days to maturity of eligible assets shall be more than two days.

c) The value of eligible assets provided as collateral shall fully cover the loan
granted plus a haircut, interest payable and other related payments. The haircut
rates can be found on the NBE website.

d) Participants are responsible for valuing their collateral, applying the applicable
haircuts before submitting their SLF requests. The specific example to calculate
the collateral value is attached in Annex E.

e) Notwithstanding sub article 4.2.3(d) of this article, National Bank’s collateral
valuation shall be the binding for final decision.

4.2.4 Settlement

a) Once the request for Standing Lending Facility is accepted, CFD of the lender
shall create appropriate SLF account and make disbursement as per this
guideline.

4.2.5 Payment Upon Maturity

a) The participant shall provide the standing instruction order for NBE to debit
their payment & settlement account at NBE with the principal amount borrowed
and interest accrued on maturity.

4.2.6 Upon maturity of the Standing Lending Facility, the participant’s payment and
settlement account at the NBE shall be debited without prior notice to the
participant with the principal amount borrowed and interest accrued, and the
collateral securities released to the borrowing bank.

4.2.7 Penalty

a) In the event that the participant fails to repay due to insufficient fund for loan on
maturity date, the interest rate shall be increased plus 3 percent of the applied
rate of Standing Lending Facility during a day.

5. STANDING DEPOSIT FACILITY
5.1 Access Facility
a) Eligible participants may make deposits with the National Bank anytime during
EATS business hours through the deposit facility without prior notice to the
National Bank.

b) Corporate Finance Directorate (CFD) shall open an account for participants and

take deposit.

c) In order to use the National Bank’s Standing Deposit Facility, an eligible

participant shall deposit funds on its standing deposit account at a ae a,

“nbe.gov.et — — NC?

PATERLE fhe VI

appropriate transfer order through Real Time Gross Settlement (Ethiopia
Automated Transfer System).
5.2 Term and Conditions
5.2.1 Interest
a) The Standing Deposit Facility rate shall be announced in advance on the NBE’s
website via Monetary and Financial Analysis Directorate.
b) Revisions to the rate shall be announced aligned to the NBE Board meetings
following decision on the monetary policy stance.
5.2.2. Time Frame

a) The maturity of the Standing Deposit Facility shall be overnight (repaid at or

before 10:00 AM of the next business day).
5.2.3. Payment Upon Maturity

a) Payment of the principal amount and the interest earned under the facility will be
made upon maturity on the following business day, to the participant’s payment
and settlement account held at the National Bank.

6. OPEN MARKET OPERATION
6.1 General Information

a) The main operations will be performed in accordance with a pre-announced
indicative schedule. As a baseline the open market operation is conducted via
auctions.

b) The open market operation can be conducted for either liquidity provision or
liquidity absorption.

c) Open market operations may also be performed through bilateral procedures
initiated by the NBE or a concerned bank, on exceptional basis, depending on the
situations in the money market as per NBE assessment. If the operations are
initiated by a concerned bank, the bank must submit written request application to
the Vice Governor & Chief Economist for approval.

d) List of persons entitled to participate on NBE’s open market operations must be
submitted in a written request application form duly signed by the president or any
other person delegated by the president and bearing the stamp of the institution.

e) Assets eligible as collateral shall meet all the required conditions stated in OMO
& SFs Directive Article 6, sub-article (1).

6.2 Announcement of Auctions

a) The main operational auction will be conducted bi-weekly basis (once every two
week) on Thursday.

b) The MFAD will prepare the announcement of the open market auction invitation
and will post on the official website of the National Bank and send the invitation
to all eligible participants by email on the business day at 3:00 PM one day before
the auction. _

c) If Thursday falls on a public holiday, the auction will be rescheduled to cithign.ae
day before or after and MFAD will announce a day before the auction Ay

nbe.gov.et
PATER! hee ATH
d) The announcement of auction shall include all the detailed lists stated in the OMO
& SFs Directive Article 20 sub-article (1).

e) Any enquiries with regard to the announcement of auctions or their results shall be
directed to MFAD on (011- 517-14-33).

6.3 Submission of Bids
a) Eligible participants shall submit their bids to MFAD through dedicative email
(sbeomo doe coy.c!), The submission form is attached in Appendix C.

b) The auction window is set at 9:00 AM to 11:00 AM.

c) Ifthe participant didn’t receive the confirmation about their bid submission status,
they should check their bid submission status by telephone to the MFAD on (011-
517-54-11) within the auction time frame.

d) In the case where bidders are unable to submit bids via email, physical delivery of
sealed bids may be submitted directly to the MFAD, but still within the
announced auction time period.

6.4 Auction Allotment

a) NBE may use fixed price auction, variable (multiple) price auction and single
(uniform) price auction. The detailed auction allotment method is described in
OMO & SFs Directive Article 22.

6.5 Announcement of Results

a) NBE will post consolidated summary of the auction results on National Bank’s
website and/or other media outlets at 3:00 PM.

b) The detailed information published on the website shall contain the list of
information stated in OMO & SFs Directive Article 23 sub-article (1).

c) The MFAD will send individual auction results to each respective participant via
email at 3:30 PM.

6.6 Settlement Procedures
a) The participant shall empower the NBE to issue payment orders in its name for
debiting purpose on the settlement date of its Account with the NBE.
b) The Settlement of open market operations will be conducted when eligible
participants satisfy all the required conditions stated in OMO & SFs Directive
Article 24.
c) Once the all the required condition satisfied, settlement of open market
operations will be conducted by CFD from 3:00 PM to 4:30 PM.
6.7 Valuation and Management of Collateral

a) The valuation of eligible collateral will be determined by CFD in consultation
with MFAD.

b) The applicable haircuts will be shared with eligible participants and published on
the NBE website via MFAD.

c) The participant has the right to replace the eligible collateral if its value exceeds

nbe.gov.et

PAAERL Mek AD
cover its obligation, as otherwise provisioned by the NBE either electronically or
written request.

d) The NBE shall have the right to request replacement of the collateral where due
diligence reveals insufficiency of the collateral held.

6.8 Penalties
a) NBE is entitled to cancel the transaction and charge penalty if the participants
failed to fulfill its payment obligations on the settlement date, failed to provide
sufficient underlying assets on the auction day. The detail of penalty charge
calculation is presented in OMO & SFs Directive Appendix-I sub-section (6).
The CFD will calculate and collect the penalty if the participants failed to fulfill
its payment obligations as per OMO and SF Directive article 28 and as stated in
this guideline section.
7. COLLATERAL SUBSTITUTION
a) The participant has the right to replace the eligible collateral by submitting the
replacement request form into the CFD. The request form is attached in Appendix
Dz.
b) To make collateral substitution, the total evaluated value of the new securities
must be equal or higher than the granted loan amount.

b

YS

8. GENERAL PROVISIONS

a) The National Bank has the right to consider specific circumstances and to deviate
from the general rules set out earlier in this document.
b) For legal purposes the OMO &SFs/001/2021 Directive is binding.

9. EFFECTIVE DATE
a) This operating guideline shall enter into forces as of July 11, 2024.

oe

be

Ao ub
sn neat

by
a

So

6

“nbe.gov.et
RATERS Mek am

Appendix A
National Bank of Ethiopia
Intraday Lending Facility Application Form

Date:

Name of Commercial Bank:

Address:

Telephone:

Requested Loan Amount

Amount (Figure) (in Millions):

Appendix A-ILF-Form

Amount in word:

Collateral Details
Description of ISIN/Serial Nominal Value Issue Date Maturity Haircut Adjusted Collateral Value
Securities Number (in Birr) Date After Deducting of

Haircut (in Birr)

Total Total Value (in
Birr)

Total Value (in Birr)

Note. please note that the requested intraday loan amount must be equal or less than the adjusted

collateral value.

Persons in charge of the bank:

Full. Name? cscasccsensevcasewss gesanssevaviss Full Name: .......
Signatures .cccsvoosssoauveoesnerwes Signature:.........
Stamp

Note: This application form should be emailed to\\)0) i) 0.20 0

4

“nbe.gov.et

PATERLE The IH

Appendix B
National Bank of Ethiopia
Standing Lending Facility Application Form

Date:

Name of Commercial Bank:

Address:

Telephone:

Requested Loan Amount:

Amount (Figure):

Appendix B-SLF-Form

Amount in word:

Collateral Details:

Description | ISIN/SNo. Nominal Issue
of Securities Value (in Date
Birr)

Securities
Value after
deduction of
haircut (in
Birr)

Maturity | Haircut Interest
Amount

(in Birr)

Adjusted Collateral Value After
Deducting of Haircut and Interest
Payment (in Birr)!

Nominal
Value (in

Birr)

Persons in charge of the bank:

FUILINGIHIG? ges cicescdardcacsnsnersarencennee Full Name:
SIQMAUTE? ssscrecnenereeeererses erences Signature:...............
Stamp

Note: This application form should be emailed to 00.) 00.20. 01

2
Total Total Total Value (in Birr)

* Note: please note that the requested overnight loan amount must be equal or less than the adjusted collateral

value.

“nbe.gov.et —

LA AERS Ade? VIN

Appendix C Appendix C- OMO-Form-1 |
National Bank of Ethiopia
Open Market Operations
Liquidity Absorbing Operations
Deposit-Taking Operation Submission Form
(Fixed Rate Auction Format)

Auction Date:

Name of Commercial Bank:

Address:

Telephone:

Email:

Amount Offered:

Amount Offered (Figure)

Amount Offered in word

Persons in charge of the bank:

Full Natties svevssevsncessnseveeavavenasanees Fall NGG! esccmsecmmnumaisen
SipMAlUtes.ccvecsesssrsessvensevevecsaeens Siphaitetessssisasssensnorewemyenuens
Stamp

Note: This application form should be emailed to)... 00.20...

“nbegovet
PATERE Mhe-k Vn

National Bank of Ethiopia Appendix C- OMO-Form-2
Open Market Operations
Liquidity Absorbing Operations
Deposit-Taking Operation Application Form
(Multiple rate/price and Uniform rate/price auction formats)

Auction Date:

Name of Commercial Bank:

Address:

Telephone:

Email:

Amount Offered and Interest Rate:

Requested Loan Amount (Figure) (in | Requested Loan Amount in word Interest Rate
Millions of Birr (%)

Persons in charge of the bank:

FULL NAME ...:n.000nencnenisiennintinsieieniome FULL NAME? .:s0scnmasoewsenenamennconnncnens
SiQNAUMPO? « ceanmwaconvcerrsmweceennetnree SIQNAtULC?.cvcccwsiorswosavoocnsssewsrawaesie
Stamp

Note: This application form should be emailed to \)-0)\\0 00.20) 0

- nbe.gov.et —
LATERE de AH

Appendix C- OMO-Form-3

National Bank of Ethiopia

Open Market Operations Application Form
Liquidity Absorbing Operations
Tender for NBE Certificate/ Outright Sale of Bills

Auction Date:

Name of Commercial Bank:

Address:

Telephone:

Fax:

Date of Issue:

Date of Maturity:

ISIN/SNo. Face Value of Bills Unit Price Offered Value Per Birr | Total Purchase Money Offered
Tendered for (in Birr) 100,000 for total Face Value (in Birr)

Persons in charge of the bank:

Full Name: ........ 0c ceeceeeeeeeeeneeeeeee ee Full Name: 2.0.0... eee eeeee eee
Signatutecscessceesesersecsecvenene SiQNAIC! sscsasincrasessaixeeseres

Stamp

Note: This application form should be emailed to 0001). oe 20. 2 : oN

if @ ae
——

Op,

~ nbe.gov.et —
PATERE Mek WH Appendix C- OMO-Form-4

National Bank of Ethiopia
Open Market Operations
Liquidity-Providing Operations
Collateralized Lending Operation Submission Form
(Fixed Rate Auction Format)

Auction Date:

Name of Commercial Bank:

Address:

Telephone:

Email:

Amount Offered:

Amount Offered (Figure)

Amount Offered in word |

List of Eligible Securities for Collateral:

haircut (in
Birr)

Types of ISIN/SNo. Nominal Value Issue Maturity | Haircut Securities Interest Adjusted Collateral Value
Securities” (in Birr) Date Date Value after Amount After Deducting of Haircut
deduction of (in Birr) and Interest Payment (in

Birr)

Total Nominal
Value (in Birr)

Persons in charge of the bank:

Full Nate? sssssicannnncisrnvacnsn Pull Nate! sscosussienevsaarssavsasooanss
Signature:.. Signature:..

Stamp

Note: This application form should be emailed to\\\00\\\0. De oy ek

? Type of securities refers eligible securities in accordance with OMO & SFs directive.

Total Value at Evaluated
Price (in Birr,

Ay,
? Please note that the offered amount must be equal or less thafi the adjusted collateral value. Naan? :

nbe.gov.et _
RATERS fde-k VIN

National Bank of Ethiopia

’ igs Appendix C- OMO-Form-5
Open Market Operations Application Form BF

Collateralized Lending Operation
(Multiple rate/price and Uniform rate/price auction format)

Date:

Name of Commercial Bank:

Address:

Telephone:

Requested Loan Amount:

Requested Loan Amount Requested Loan Amount
(Figure) in word

Interest Rate (%)

BID #1

BID #2
BID #3

List of Eligible Securities for Collateral:

ISIN/SNo. | Nominal Value Maturity | Haircut
(in Birr) Date

Types of
Securities*

Interest Securities Value Adjusted
Amount after deduction of | Collateral Value

(in Birr) haircut (in Birr) | After Deducting

of Haircut and
Interest Payment
in Birr)*

Total Nominal
Value (in Birr)

Total Value at
Evaluated Price (in
Birr)

Persons in charge of the bank:

Full Name: ...........ceeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeee Full Name? ........ ce ceeeeeeeeeeeeeene ees

Signature:.

Stamp
Note: This application form should be emailed to

* Type of securities refers eligible securities in accordance with
5 Please note that the offered amount must be equal or les:

O & SFs directive.
an the adjusted collateral va

nbe.gov.et
RATERS he k VI

Appendix D

NATIONAL BANK OF ETHIOPIA Annex D-CS-Form-1

Collateral Substitution Application Form

Date:

Name of Commercial Bank:

Address:

Telephone:

PARTICULARS OF COLLATERAL TO BE SUBSTITUTED

Current (Pledged Securities)

Maturity Securities Value after | Interest
Date t deduction of haircut | Amount
(in Birr)

Description of
Securities

ISIN/SN | Nominal Value
Code (in Birr) Date

Adjusted Collateral Value

After Deducting of Haircut

and Interest Payment (in
Birr)’

Total Nominal

Total Value at Evaluated Price (in
Value (in Birr)

Birr)

Replaced by (new securities)

Description of ISIN/SN Nominal Value Haircut | Securities Value after Adjusted Collateral Value
Securities Code (in Birr) Date Date deduction of haircut Interest After Deducting of Haircut
(in Birr) Amount and Interest Payment (in

Birr,

Total Total Nominal Total Value at Evaluated Price (in
Value (in Birr) Birr)

Persons in charge of the bank:

Fall Nam secwrseressseavesssneoaessaeaners Full Neti sissies
Signature:..........:cccesceeeeeeeees Sigmature:........cccsceceseseseseeee
Stamp

Note: This application form should be emailed to 00) 0 2

| cag
5 Note: please note that the total evaluated value of the new securities must be equal or higher than-~
the granted loan amount.

nbe.gov.et
RATERS The k VIN

Appendix E

Interest Rate and Adjusted Collateral Value Calculation
i. Interest Rate Calculation
A simple interest rate is applied for Standing Lending Facility based on the number of actual
days divided by 365 day count convention as follow:
= eT * t
I=P*i,, 365
Where; P = Amount of Loan, ig; = Rate of interest for SLF, t = time period of the loan (t=1

for overnight) and I = Simple interest on loan

Example: Suppose Bank A borrowed Birr 1,000,000 on SLF from the NBE with the
interest rate of 10 %, the simple interest rate calculation would be:
I =1,000,000* 0.10* =a
365
I= Birr 274.0
2. Adjusted Collateral Value Calculation
The collateral shall be established before the credit is granted and their adjusted value shall
cover 100 % of the loan, the due interest and a haircut. Therefore, the adjusted value of
eligible assets to be pledged as a collateral can be calculated as follow:

Haircut | Securities Value
(%) after deduction of
haircut

Interest Rate | Requested Interest Adjusted collateral value
Loan Amount | Amount? (after deduction of haircut &

(in Birr) interest payment)

Nominal Value of Securities
(in Birr)

(5=1*(100%-
haircut rate)

(B=776"136_ | (9=5-8)
5

Total Nominal Value (in

Total Adjusted Collateral
Birr)

Value (in Birr)

7 The symbol ‘t’ refers to number of days.

nbe.gov.et
