CATER LE 1Ndd &@ AD
NATIONAL BANK OF ETHIOPIA
ADDIS ABABA

LICENSING AND AUTHORIZATION OF PAYMENT INSTRUMENT
ISSUER AND PAYMENT SYSTEM OPERATOR

Manner of Equity Investment by Foreign Nationals of Ethiopian Origin
and Organizations in Payment Instrument Issuance & Payment System

Operator Directive No.ONPS/04/2021

Whereas, Foreign Nationals of Ethiopian Origin or Organizations have been allowed to invest in

the payment instrument issuance and payment system operator businesses in Ethiopia;

Whereas, there is a need to put in place implementation modality for investment by Foreign
Nationals of Ethiopian Origin or Organizations in payment instrument issuance and payment

operator businesses in Ethiopia;

Now, therefore, in accordance with article 4/2a and article 37/2 of National Payment System
Proclamation No.718/2011 and articles 9 (1&2) and 58 of Banking Business (as amended)
Proclamation no.1159/2019 and articles 20 (2) and 27 (2) of the National Bank of Ethiopia

Establishment (as Amended) Proclamation No. 591/2008, the National Bank of Ethiopia has
issued this Directive, :

1. Short Title

This Directive may be cited as “Manner of Equity Investment by Foreign Nationals of
Ethiopian Origin or Organizations in Payment Instrument Issuer or Payment System
Operator Business Directive No.ONPS/04/2021”.

°2. Definitions

For the purpose of this Directive, unless the context requires otherwise, the term:

C. &

P f 10
ALE (AF IAG 7H, 5550/2048 hh #TC 0115 51 45 88 AN eR 0115 51 ARGH OF 10,

ADDRESS: SUDAN STRCET P.O.BOX. $550/2048 FAX No. 0115514588 TEL. No. 0115517430 ADDIS ABABA
TELEGRAPHIC ADDRESS: NATIONBANK :
CODES-USED PETERSON 3%& 4" ED BENTLEY'S 2™ PHRASE A.B.C, 6" EDITIO
E-mail: nbe.excd@ athionet.et Website. www.http:// www nbe.gov.et
2.1.

2.2.

2.3.

2.4.

2.5,

2.6.

2.7.

2.8

2.9.

“Acceptable Foreign Currency” means foreign currency which is declared to be
acceptable for payment in Ethiopia by the National Bank and shall include United States
Dollar, Great Britain Pound Sterling, Euro and other currencies that the National Bank may

specify to be acceptable for this purpose from time to time.

“Foreign National of Ethiopian Origin” means a person with a valid identification card
obtained pursuant to Proclamation No. 270/2012 attesting that he/she is a Foreign National
of Ethiopian Origin;

“Mid exchange rate” means exchange rate between buying and selling rate of a day set by
the National Bank;

“National Bank” means the National Bank of Ethiopia;

“Organization” means an entity that is fully owned by Foreign Nationals of Ethiopian
origin or jointly by Foreign Nationals of Ethiopian Origin and Ethiopian Nationals, located
within or outside Ethiopia.

“Payment Instrument Issuer” means a Payment Instrument Issuer licensed by the

National Bank to undertake payment instrument issuance business in Ethiopia;

“Payment Instrument Issuer (under formation)” means a Payment Instrument Issuer
that has applied for a payment instrument issuance business license from the National Bank;
“Payment System Operator” means a Payment System Operator licensed by the National
Bank to undertake payment system operator business in Ethiopia;

“Payment System Operator (under formation)” means a Payment System Operator that

has applied for a payment system operator business license from the National Bank.

3. Scope of Application

The provisions of this Directive shall be applicable to existing Payment System Operator and

Payment Instrument Issuer and Payment System Operator (under formation) and Payment

Instrument Issuer (under formation).

Li «4

Page 2 of 10
4. Share Subscription

4.1. Place of Share Subscription

4.1.1

All subscriptions including initial and subsequent sales of shares to Foreign Nationals of

Ethiopian Origin or Organizations shall take place only in the geographical territory of
Ethiopia.

Notwithstanding the provision stated under sub-article 4.1.1 of this article, a Payment
Instrument Issuer or a Payment System Operator or a Payment Instrument Issuer (under
formation) or a Payment System Operator (under formation) may conduct promotional

and other related preliminary activities needed for share subscription outside Ethiopia.

4.2. Manner of Share Subscriptions and Surrender Requirement

4.2.1.

4.2.3.

A Payment Instrument Issuer or a Payment System Operator or a Payment Instrument
Issuer (under formation) or a Payment System Operator (under formation) shall submit a
written application to the National Bank to open foreign currency escrow account for the
purpose of accepting share payment indicating the name of the bank and branch (es)

where the account is to be opened; and shall report the account number so opened to the
National Bank.

. A bank instructed by the National Bank to surrender 30% (thirty percent) of the foreign

currency that is maintained in line with sub-article 4.2.1 of this article shall surrender, to

the National Bank, with in five working days from the receipt of the order.

Upon receipt of the foreign currency surrendered as per sub-article 4.2.2 of this article
and the summary of the share subscription as per Annex-I, the National Bank shall credit
the payment and settlement account of the bank with the equivalent amount of Ethiopian

Birr at the prevailing mid exchange rate.

. A bank instructed by the National Bank to unblock the foreign currency escrow account

ofa newly licensed Payment Instrument Issuer or Payment System Operator shall transfer

the Birr equivalent of the full amount of the foreign currency collected and maintained in

Page 3 of 10

Li £4
the escrow account at a prevailing buying rate to the account of the newly licensed

Payment Instrument Issuer or Payment System Operator.

4.2.5, Notwithstanding the provisions stated under sub-article 4.2.1 herein above, a Payment
Instrument Issuer or Payment System Operator shall open a foreign currency bank
account with the National Bank’s approval for accepting share payment and share

premium (if any) from Foreign Nationals of Ethiopian Origin or Organizations.

4.2.6. The bank that maintained the foreign currency account as per sub-article 4.2.5 of this
article, shall surrender 30% (thirty percent) of the foreign currency collected from
subscription of shares to the National Bank in accordance with Foreign Exchange
Surrender Requirements of Banks (as amended) Directives No. FXD/54/2018 and
transfer the Birr equivalent of full amount of the foreign currency collected to the account

of the payment instrument issuer or payment system operator at the prevailing buying
rate.

4.3. Payment of Share Subscriptions

4.3.1. Payment of the full value of initially subscribed shares and share premium (if any) by
Foreign Nationals of Ethiopian Origin or Organizations shall be made in acceptable
foreign currency.

4.3.2. Dividend generated from investment activities of Foreign Nationals of Ethiopian Origin
or Organizations in other sectors and deemed eligible for repatriation by the National
Bank can be used for the purpose of share purchase in a Payment Instrument Issuer or a
Payment System Operator or a Payment Instrument Issuer (under formation) or a

Payment System Operator (under formation).

4.3.3. The funds to be paid by Foreign Nationals of Ethiopian Origin or Organizations for the
purpose of share purchase shall be transferred to the account opened and maintained in a

bank for this purpose only through banking system.

4.3.4. Notwithstanding the provision stated under sub-article 4.3.3 hereinabove, Foreign

Nationals of Ethiopian Origin or Organizations having a Non-Resident Foreign Currency

]

Page 4 of 10

Co
4.3.5,

Account with local banks may transfer the foreign currency deposited in this account for
the purpose of share purchase.

Transfer of funds made by Foreign Nationals of Ethiopian Origin or Organizations for the
purpose of share purchase through foreign payment cards, cash whether declared or not
and international money transfer organizations that cannot generate credit advice at

individual level showing the identity, amount and purpose of the transfer, shall not be

allowed,

In the case of investment in a Payment Instrument Issuer or Payment System Operator or
a Payment Instrument Issuer (under formation) or Payment System Operator (under
formation) by an organization owned by Ethiopian Nationals and Foreign Nationals of
Ethiopian Origin, payment of share subscription in foreign currency shall be made to the
extent of percentage shareholding of Foreign Nationals of Ethiopian Origin in that

organization while the remaining subscription balance can be paid in Ethiopian Birr.

4.4. Verification and Validation of Subscribed Shares

4.4.1.

4.4.2.

4.4.3.

A Payment Instrument Issuer or a Payment System Operator or a Payment Instrument
Issuer (under formation) or a Payment System Operator (under formation) that floats the

shares shall assume the responsibility of ensuring compliance with sub-article 4.3 of this
Directive.

A Payment Instrument Issuer or a Payment System Operator or a Payment Instrument
Issuer (under formation) or a Payment System Operator (under formation) shall ensure
matters related to proper identification of the Foreign Nationals of Ethiopian Origin or
Organizations (including its shareholders), proper execution of bank transfer detail and
documentation and submission of documents including list of subscribers, subscriber’s
nationality identification documents and foreign currency credit advice and any other

related documents to the National Bank.

To ensure that the share subscription has been made in line with this Directive and other
relevant laws, Payment Instrument Issuer (under formation) or Payment System Operator

(under formation) that sold shares to Foreign Nationals of Ethiopian Origin or

/

OCA

Page 5 of 10
Organizations shall ensure that the share subscriptions and related payments are audited

along with the audit of pre-establishment costs and submit the report to the National Bank
accordingly.

4.4.4. A Payment Instrument Issuer and Payment System Operator shall develop comprehensive
policies and procedures for handling of share subscription by Foreign Nationals of
Ethiopian Origin or Organizations. Accordingly, the policies and procedures, among
others, shall address:

"promotion and share subscription process;

*" identification of Foreign Nationals of Ethiopian Origin or Organizations
(including its shareholders);

" payment details and modalities of share subscription;

"foreign currency surrender to the National Bank; and

* share transfer involving Foreign Nationals of Ethiopian Origin or

Organizations (including its shareholders).

4.4.5. A Payment Instrument Issuer or Payment System Operator or a Payment Instrument
Issuer (under formation) or a Payment System Operator (under formation) shall ensure
that a person or shareholders of an organization who acquires a share through transfer or

any means holds a valid document evidencing his/her nationality and other related status.

5. Share Transfer

5.1. A share may be transferred from Ethiopian Nationals to Foreign Nationals of Ethiopian
Origin or Organizations through sell in acceptable foreign currency transferred through

banks at a share price not less than par value.

5.2. Shares shall not be acquired by Foreign Nationals of Ethiopian Origin or Organizations
through donation.

5.3. Shares may be transferred from Ethiopian Nationals to Foreign Nationals of Ethiopian

Origin through succession.

wh TA Page 6 of 10
6.

6.1.

6.2.

Ts

Tels

Tad

8.

Dividend Payment

Dividends earned as a result of investment in a Payment Instrument Issuer or a Payment
System Operator by Foreign Nationals of Ethiopian Origin or Organizations shall be paid in
Ethiopian Birr, and shall not be repatriated,

Dividends earned in accordance with sub-article 6.1 of this article may be used for purchase
and payment of newly issued and subscribed shares in the same Payment Instrument Issuer

or Payment System Operator.

Reporting

A Payment Instrument Issuer or a Payment System Operator or a Payment Instrument Issuer
(under formation) or a Payment System Operator (under formation) shall report summary of
share subscription by Foreign Nationals of Ethiopian Origin or Organizations to, the
National Bank with supporting documents, as per sub article 4.4.2 and Annex I of this

Directive along with application for Payment Instrument Issuer or Payment System

Operator business license.

A Payment Instrument Issuer or Payment System Operator shall submit summary of share
subscribed by Foreign Nationals of Ethiopian Origin or Organizations to the National Bank,
as per sub article 4.4.2 and Annex IT and ILI of this Directive, on a quarterly basis. In case

of no subscription during the quarter, a Payment Instrument Issuer or Payment System

Operator may submit a “Nil” report.

Effective Date

This Directive shall be effective as of 1° day of July 2021. '
Poems 4K

e (pnd
19

Page 7 of 10
OT JO g ase

SUONRZIURTIO JaysuBI] KOUDA/AUNODDY AdUa.LIND UBIII0,J ]UOPIS2s-UON, 7
“Jequiosqns ay} Aq rsodap Jo ayep ay} uo aye ayy st aye1 SuLANg Surpreasig ‘

aeq

aunqeusisg
uonIsodg
ee es kq poaoiddy

ee ee eee ee eee es Ag poredaig

JUNOWE pdr1opUstANS [&}0 7

]

T
| 1301,
[
1 | _|
ZO.LIN/ t (a) (dxV) | (a) (Vv
VouTIN;LITASS (a-o)=a | Garg wy) (aig u) aueyg | paquasqn
ysnoayy ey
pauisodap Sukng saieys Su yunoury junowy yoeq jo sorey “ONI Aaquiosqns
3 peytweay | Supeadig 1pur3sino | dn pied | uondiiasqng | anjea seg | jo aaquinyl yaodsseg| Ayeuonen | ay) Jo auieNy “ON

ses cpottag Sunsoday

“teeeeeeeeereeeeseres 3(HOHBULIOS JapuN) 10;819dG ua3sXg juDWARY 10 (UOFEULIOJ AopunN) agnssy JUOWINAYSUT quourARg 94) Jo aMeNY

vidompy Jo yar” peuonEN

UOHLZTUESIO 10 UISHO UvIdOIyIy JO SEUOHEN Uslo10g Aq UONLOSqNy o1vyy jo AAeOTuMNG

(aonvulioy Japun) 10}v19dQ wajsdg juaMAEY 40
(uoneuLioy JepuN) Janssy juOUINQSUY JUDWARY 10 10)e.19dQ Waysds JUOWATY 10 Jonss] juaWMAjsuy pUDWIARY 10g) [ xouUy

hv
OT 40 6 ade

“suoHwzjULBIQ saysuBly KAUOW/UNODIY AOUDLIND UBIO10J 1UPPISOI-UON
“JQJSUBI] OIBYS WO S11 JI — LS pue soseys Surpueysino yo yuawAed woy st J! — Od “apjoyazeys sunstxa

0} Sameys wou [PUOIPpE Jo UONdUOSqns WO STITT AN Yapoyareys mau O} Sazeys Mou SI 2ouRNsS! ay) Jl - NN Suyeys Aq saseys Jo uoIsinboe JO 12UUBL dy] DLSIPUI ased|q ¥
“doqlaosqns ayy Aq ysodap Jo ayep ay uo ayes ayy SI ayes SurAng Buypiwaard .

suameenunawaxnes eeseieeenereeeeeeee gap - 3eq
3 INBUBIS Prerr rer Serr eer eee eee ee eee 3 Nyeust S
Sr uonsod
Prrerrrr ree eee ee eee Aq poaoiddy eee reer ee eee eee ee Ag poiedaig
|
| [F101
{ fo |
OL
W/VOAIN
/LAIMS
ysnoiyy d-O=4 (a) (daW)=9 (v)
payisodap | ,uonisinbay ey (aug uy | Garg up (441g ur) (a) paqiosqns
» aaeys | suring 3 soaeys su | junoury qunoury aAvys YoVy sa.ieys “ON sAaqiuosqns
poywiwey | jousuueyy | ulpeaatg | ipuvysing | dn preg | uondisosqng | jo onje, seg jo soquinyy ysodsseg Apypeuonen ay} JO VWEN ON
spe sore gantces :popury 1aarend au 10

ssciisiidaiieianaiaiiatadiis ** roreledgQ waysXg yuowARg 10 Jonss] JUOWMSUT JUOWARg OY] JO OWRN

WOHCZUCSAG) 10 UlSLIGQ ULIGOIgy | JO S[EUOHEN] UdioIOY AG SUOHAEOSGnyg d1egg AjAojAEN

Bidorgyg Jo yueg [eUOHEN|

[Dy xouuy
OT 40 OT aed Ww

SERE Gie pip Wibis wikis igiel Risa So's SBE wae eine uollsog

Saeeaaanesealnceeenonscee anaes uonIsog
Stee eeeeen ee seen ewe eee en eeee kg poaoiddy Sete eee eee e teen rere etter eee Ag paiedoig

qUNOWY JapUud.Ling [v0],
e901,

on |

O.LIA/VOAUN/LATAS (@ (a.W=9 | (a) Gad (v) ‘ON) AMBUOHEN | Jequosqns ey jo aweN
ysnoayy (a-D)=a] Garg a) (4g a1) | up) eavys} paqiiosqns | y10dssu
pousodap 3 payruay saieys| junoury junowy yoeq jo SatBys

SuypueysynQ} dn preg | wondisosqng) onjea seg] Jo soquiny,

sia ui aa wisata 6 ainciaws erates :popuq souen?) ou 10]

Sere Rebate oletle Pee uoyeradg wiayshg JuouARY JO Jonss] JuoWMsuy yUoWARY oy} JO OUTeN,

SUOHEZIUESIQ 10 UlslIGQ UkIdOIM}y JO SEUOHEN] Usl0104 Aq SUOI}AIIOSqng segs JO AlvuoIng OATeyNUMN,»)

EIdonjyg Jo Jug peuoHeN

Ti wouay
