          
              
 
 
 
Bank Supervision Directorate 
 
May 2010 
1
 
 
Bank Risk Management Guidelines (Revised) 
 
National Bank of Ethiopia 
 
 
1. INTRODUCTION 
 
Risk-taking is an inherent element of banking and, indeed, profits are in part the reward for 
successful risk taking. In contrary, excessive, poorly managed risk can lead to distresses and 
failures of banks. Risks are, therefore, warranted when they are understandable, measurable, 
controllable and within a bank’s capacity to withstand adverse results. 
 
Although underdeveloped, the banking system in Ethiopia has witnessed a significant 
expansion over the past few years. The National Bank of Ethiopia (NBE) believes such 
growth should be matched to strong risk management practices. As a result, the NBE has 
revised the risk management framework it issued in 2003 to all banks so as to incorporate 
latest developments in the area. 
 
This revised document, consistent with international standards and best practices, is 
expected to provide minimum risk management (risk identification, measurement, 
monitoring and control) standards for all banks operating in the country. It covers the most 
common and interrelated risks facing banks in the country, namely, credit, liquidity, market 
and operational risks. The guidelines are thus expected to assist risk-based supervision and 
contribute towards safety and soundness of the banking system.   
 
In order to implement the Guidelines properly, all banks that do not currently have risk 
management structure shall immediately set up such structure that shall concentrate fully on 
the risk management functions (see Annex III) preferably reporting directly to the 
board/its risk management committee for independence. At the outset, the risk manager and 
his/her team shall be expected to establish comprehensive risk management program. This 
program, as will be detailed in the document, should at least contain: 
 
 
• active board and senior management oversight; 
• adequate policies, procedures and limits; 
• adequate risk monitoring and management information system; and 
          
              
 
 
 
Bank Supervision Directorate 
 
May 2010 
2
• adequate internal control. 
 
The program shall be acceptable to and approved by the NBE. To this end, all banks shall 
submit copies and conduct walkthrough presentations of their programs to the Bank. The 
NBE shall also review the adequacy of implementation of the risk management program of 
each bank through off-site analysis and on-site examinations. It shall also conduct risk 
assessment visits to banks, as may be required. Updates to the risk management programs 
shall also be submitted to the NBE within 15 days from their effective dates.    
 
The rest of these guidelines are divided into four sections. Section 2 deals with credit risk 
management guidelines, while sections 3 through 5 are concerned with liquidity risk 
management, market risk management, and operational risk management guidelines, 
respectively.  
 
 
 
 
2. CREDIT RISK MANAGEMENT GUIDELINES 
 
2.1 Introduction 
Experiences elsewhere in the world suggest that the key risk in a bank has been credit risk. 
Indeed, failure to collect loans granted to customers has been the major factor behind the 
collapse of many banks around the world. Banks need to manage credit risk inherent in the 
entire portfolio as well as the risk in individual credits or transactions. Additionally, banks 
should be aware that credit risk does not exist in isolation from other risks, but is closely 
intertwined with those risks. Effective credit risk management is the process of managing an 
institution’s activities which create credit risk exposures, in a manner that significantly 
reduces the likelihood that such activities will impact negatively on a bank’s earnings and 
capital. Credit risk is not confined to a bank’s loan portfolio, but can also exist in its other 
assets and activities. Likewise, such risk can exist in both a bank’s on-balance sheet and its 
off-balance sheet accounts. 
2.2 Board and Senior Management Oversight 
 
2.2.1 Board Responsibilities 
 
The board of directors is responsible for reviewing and approving a bank’s credit risk 
strategy and policies. Each bank should develop a strategy that sets the objectives of its 
credit-granting activities and adopts the necessary policies and procedures for conducting 
such activities.  The board shall: 
 
• approve broad business strategies and policies that govern or influence the management 
of credit risk of the bank;   
          
              
 
 
 
Bank Supervision Directorate 
 
May 2010 
3
• set out the banks’ tolerance for credit risk in the context of types of credits, economic 
sectors, geographical locations, currencies, and maturities 1; 
• establish goals for credit quality, earnings and growth; 
• clearly define credit-related delegation of authority and approval levels; 
• ensure that senior management has a full understanding of the credit risk incurred by the 
bank; 
• ensure that the bank’s management adopts procedures to ensure that the objectives of 
the strategy and policies are achieved; 
• ensure that credit risk is adequately measured, monitored and controlled;  
• effectively communicate the strategies and policies to all relevant bank personnel; and 
• periodically re-evaluate significant credit risk management policies as well as overall 
business strategies that affect the credit risk exposure of the bank. 
 
The board of directors shall also be responsible for monitoring compliance with the credit 
risk management strategy. This is usually accomplished through periodic reporting of 
management and internal auditors. The reports shall provide sufficient information to satisfy 
the board of directors that a bank is complying with its credit risk management policies and 
NBE directives.  The board shall review loans in line with NBE directives on provisions.  
Moreover, the board of directors shall: 
 
• conduct/require independent reviews of credit operations to assess whether the bank’s 
policies and procedures are being properly followed on ongoing basis;  
• review exposures and policies regarding credit to related parties as defined by the NBE 
directives;  
• review exposures and policies regarding credit to companies controlled by the bank 
through ownership or management structure;  
• review all credit exposures that are in excess of the credit approval authority delegated to 
management; 
• review all restructured exposures; 
• review trends in portfolio quality and the adequacy of the bank’s provision for credit 
losses;  
• specify the content and frequency of management reports to the board on credit risk 
management; and 
• ensure compliance with all relevant laws, regulations and NBE directives. 
 
2.2.2 Management Responsibilities 
 
Senior management has the responsibility for implementing the credit risk strategy approved by 
the board of directors and for developing policies and procedures for identifying, measuring, 
monitoring and controlling credit risk. Such policies and procedures should address credit 
risk in all of the bank’s activities at both the individual credit and portfolio levels.  Senior 
                                                          
 
1 Types of credit might also include identifying target markets and the overall characteristics the bank seeks 
in its credit portfolio (including levels of diversification and concentration tolerances). 
 
          
              
 
 
 
Bank Supervision Directorate 
 
May 2010 
4
management must ensure that there is a periodic independent internal or external assessment 
of the bank’s credit management functions. 
 
Management of each bank shall: 
 
• develop procedures and practices that facilitate the implementation of the broad credit 
risk management strategy and policies adopted by the board;  
• undertake the management of credit risk in accordance the delegated authority 
developed by the board; 
• develop measures that will facilitate the measurement, monitoring and control of credit 
risk; 
• implement a system of internal controls that will serve as an effective check over the 
measures used to manage credit risk; 
• ensure that internal audit reviews the credit risk management system on an on-going 
basis; 
• monitor the quality of the credit portfolio and ensure that the portfolio is classified in 
line with the NBE Directives on Provisioning, uncollectible exposures written off and 
loan  losses provisions are accounted in line with the NBE requirements; 
• ensure that internal audit reviews are conducted on an ongoing basis and assess the 
credit portfolio and credit risk management system;   
• develop lines of communication to ensure the timely dissemination of credit risk 
management policies and other credit risk management information to all individuals 
involved in the process; and 
• develop an effective system of reporting to the board on issues related to the 
management of credit risk. 
  
2.3 Policies, Procedures and Limits 
 
2.3.1 Credit Policies 
 
The foundation for effective credit risk management is the identification of existing and 
potential risks in the bank’s credit products and credit activities. This creates the need for 
development and implementation of clearly defined policies, formally established in writing, 
which set out the credit risk philosophy of the bank and the parameters under which credit 
risk is to be controlled. Measuring the risks attached to each credit activity permits a 
platform against which the bank can make critical decisions about the nature and scope of 
the credit activity it is willing to undertake.  
 
A cornerstone of safe and sound banking is the design and implementation of written 
policies and procedures related to identifying, measuring, monitoring and controlling credit 
risk. Credit policies establish the framework for lending and guide the credit-granting 
activities of the bank. The policies should be designed and implemented with consideration 
for internal and external factors such as the bank’s market position, trade area, staff 
capabilities and technology; and should particularly establish targets for portfolio mix and 
exposure limits to single counterparties, groups of connected counterparties, industries or 
economic sectors, geographic regions and specific products. Effective policies and 
          
              
 
 
 
Bank Supervision Directorate 
 
May 2010 
5
procedures enable a bank to: maintain sound credit-granting standards; monitor and control 
credit risk; properly evaluate new business opportunities; and identify and administer 
problem credits. Credit policies need to contain, at a minimum: 
 
• a credit risk philosophy2 governing the extent to which the bank is willing to assume 
credit risk; 
• general areas of credit in which the bank is prepared to engage or is restricted from 
engaging; 
• clearly defined and appropriate levels of delegation of approval, and provision or write-
off authorities; and 
• sound and prudent portfolio concentration limits. 
 
The basis for an effective credit risk management process is the identification and analysis of 
existing and potential risks inherent in any product or activity. Consequently, it is important 
that banks identify the credit risk inherent in all the products they offer and the activities in 
which they engage. This is particularly true for those products and activities that are new to 
the bank where risk may be less obvious and which may require more analysis than 
traditional credit-granting activities. Although such activities may require tailored procedures 
and controls, the basic principles of credit risk management will still apply. All new products 
and activities should receive board approval before being offered by the bank. 
 
2.3.2 Credit Analysis and Approval Process 
 
Prior to entering into any new credit relationship, consideration shall be given to the integrity 
and reputation of the party as well as their legal capacity to assume the liability.  Banks need 
to understand to whom they are granting credit. Therefore, prior to entering into any new 
credit relationship, a bank shall become familiar with the borrower or counterparty and be 
confident that they are dealing with an individual or organization of sound repute and 
creditworthiness. In particular, strict policies shall be in place to avoid association with 
individuals involved in criminal activities.  
 
Establishing sound, well-defined credit-granting criteria is essential to approving credit in a 
safe and sound manner. In order to conduct an effective credit-granting program, banks 
shall receive sufficient information to enable a comprehensive assessment of the risk profile 
of the counterparty. Depending on the type of credit exposure and the nature of the credit 
relationship with the counterparty, the factors to be considered and documented in credit 
granting include: 
 
• purpose of the credit and sources of repayment; 
• borrower’s repayment history and current capacity to repay, based on historical financial 
trends and future cash flow projections under various scenarios; 
                                                          
 
2 The credit risk philosophy is a statement of principles and objectives that outline a bank’s willingness to 
assume credit risk. It will vary with the nature and complexity of its business, the extent of other risks 
assumed, its ability to absorb losses and the minimum expected return acceptable for a specific level of 
risk. 
 
          
              
 
 
 
Bank Supervision Directorate 
 
May 2010 
6
• terms and conditions of the credit including covenants designed to limit changes in the 
future risk profile of the borrower; 
• adequacy and enforceability of collateral or guarantees under various scenarios; 
• current risk profile of the counterparty (including the nature and aggregate amounts of 
risk), and sensitivity to economic and market developments, especially for major 
exposures; and 
• borrower’s business expertise and management capability. 
 
Occasionally, banks may participate in loan syndications or other such loan consortia. In 
such cases, undue reliance should not be placed on the risk analysis performed by the lead 
underwriter or external credit assessors. Rather, syndicate participants should perform their 
own risk analysis prior to committing to the syndication. Such analysis should be conducted 
in the same manner as directly sourced loans. 
 
In order to maintain a sound credit portfolio, a bank must have a clearly established process 
in place for approving new credits as well as extensions or renewal and refinancing of 
existing credits.  Approvals should be made in accordance with the bank’s written guidelines 
and granted by the appropriate level of management. There should be a clear audit trail 
documenting the approval process and identifying the individual(s) and/or committee(s) 
making the credit decision.  
 
Each credit proposal should be subject to careful analysis by a qualified credit analyst with 
expertise commensurate with the size and complexity of the transaction. An effective 
evaluation process establishes minimum requirements for the information on which the 
analysis is to be based as listed above. The information received will be the basis for any 
internal evaluation or rating assigned to the credit and its accuracy and adequacy is critical to 
management making appropriate judgments about the acceptability of the credit. 
 
2.3.3 Authority for Loan Approval 
 
Banks must develop a corps of credit analysts who have the experience, knowledge and 
background to exercise prudent judgment in assessing, approving and managing credit. A 
bank’s credit approval process should establish accountability for decisions taken and 
designate the individuals who have authority to approve credits or changes in credit terms. 
Depending upon its size and nature, credit may be approved through individual authority, 
joint authorities or through a committee. Approval authorities should be commensurate with 
the expertise of the individuals involved and the delegation of authority should include, as a 
minimum: 
 
• the absolute and/or incremental credit approval authority being delegated; 
• the provision or write –off authority being delegated; 
• the officers, positions or committees to whom authority is being delegated; 
• the ability of recipients to further delegate risk approval and write-off authority; and 
• the restrictions, if any, placed on the use of delegated risk approval and write-off 
authorities. 
 
          
              
 
 
 
Bank Supervision Directorate 
 
May 2010 
7
The degree of delegation of authority will depend on a number of variables, including: 
• the bank’s credit risk philosophy; 
• the quality of the credit portfolio; 
• the degree of market responsiveness required; 
• the types of risks being assessed; and 
• the experience of lending officers. 
 
2.3.4 Related Party Transactions 
 
A potential area of abuse arises from granting credit to related parties, whether companies or 
individuals3. Consequently, it is important that banks grant credit to such parties on an 
arm’s-length basis and that the amount of credit granted is suitably monitored. Such controls 
are most easily implemented by requiring that the terms and conditions of such credits not 
be more favorable than credit granted to non-related borrowers under similar circumstances 
and by imposing absolute limits on such credits. The bank’s credit-granting criteria should 
not be altered to accommodate related companies and individuals. Material transactions with 
related parties should be subject to the prior approval of the board of directors (excluding 
board members with conflicts of interest), and reported to the banking supervisory 
authorities. 
 
2.3.5 Lending to Connected Parties  
 
Banks should have credit granting procedures in place that identify connected counterparties 
as a single obligor which means aggregating exposures to groups of counterparties 
(corporate or non-corporate) that exhibit financial interdependence by way of common 
ownership, common control, or other connecting links (for example, common Management, 
familiar ties).  Identification of connected counterparties requires a careful analysis of the 
impact of the above factors (e.g. common ownership and control) on the financial 
interdependence of the parties involved.   
 
2.3.6 Credit Limits and Credit Concentration 
 
To ensure diversification, exposure limits are needed in all areas of the bank’s activities that 
involve credit risk. Banks should establish credit limits for individual counterparties and 
groups of connected counterparties that aggregate different types of on and off balance 
sheet exposures.  Such limits are frequently based on internal risk ratings that allow higher 
exposure limits for counterparties with higher ratings. Under no circumstance can limits 
established by banks be higher than regulatory limits set by NBE. Limits should also be 
established for particular industries or economic sectors, geographic regions specific 
products, a class of security, and group of associated borrowers. 
 
Credit Concentration 
 
                                                          
 
3Related parties can include the bank’s subsidiaries and affiliates, its major (owning 2% and above) 
shareholders, directors and senior management, and their direct and related interests, as well as any party 
that the bank exerts control over or that exerts control over the bank. 
 
          
              
 
 
 
Bank Supervision Directorate 
 
May 2010 
8
Credit concentration can occur when a bank’s portfolio contains a high level of direct or 
indirect credits to: 
 
• a single counterparty; 
• a group of related counter parties; 
• an industry; 
• a geographical region; 
• a type of credit facility (i.e. overdrafts); and 
• a class of collateral. 
 
Excessive concentration renders a bank vulnerable to adverse changes in the area in which 
the credit is concentrated and to violations of statutory and regulatory limits.  Sound and 
prudent risk management involves the minimization of concentration risk by diversifying the 
credit portfolio. At a minimum, credit diversification policies should: 
 
• be stated clearly 
• include goals for portfolio mix; 
• place exposure limits on single counter parties and groups of associated counter parties, 
key industries or economic sectors, geographical regions and new or existing products; 
and 
• be in compliance with NBE statutory and regulatory limits on large exposures. 
 
In considering potential credits, banks must recognize the necessity of establishing 
provisions for identified and expected losses in line with the NBE directives on provisions 
and holding adequate capital to absorb unexpected losses. These considerations should 
factor into credit-granting decisions as well as the overall portfolio risk management process. 
 
2.3.7 Credit Risk Mitigation  
 
A number of techniques are available to banks to assist in the mitigation of credit risk. 
Collateral and guarantees are the most commonly used. Notwithstanding the use of various 
mitigation techniques individual credits transactions should be entered into primarily on the 
strength of the borrower’s repayment capacity. Banks should also be mindful that the value 
of collateral might well be impaired by the same factors that have led to the diminished 
recoverability of the credit.  
 
Banks should have policies covering the acceptability of various forms of collateral, 
procedures for the ongoing valuation of such collateral, and a process to ensure that 
collateral is, and continues to be, enforceable and realizable. With regard to guarantees, 
banks should evaluate the level of coverage being provided in relation to the credit-quality 
and legal capacity of the guarantor.  Banks should be careful when making assumptions 
about implied support from third parties including government entities. When engaged in 
interbank transactions, banks often rely on netting agreements as a means of reducing credit 
risks.  It should be noted, however, that such agreements need to be sound and legally 
enforceable. 
 
          
              
 
 
 
Bank Supervision Directorate 
 
May 2010 
9
2.4 Measurement, Monitoring and Control 
 
Failure to establish adequate procedures to effectively monitor and control the credit 
function within established guidelines has resulted in credit problems for many banks around 
the world. Compromising credit policies and procedures has been another major cause of 
credit problems. Accordingly, each bank needs to develop and implement comprehensive 
procedures and information systems to effectively monitor and control the risks inherent in 
its credit portfolio. These procedures need to define prudent criteria for identifying and 
reporting potential problem accounts to ensure that such accounts are identified for more 
frequent review, followed up with appropriate corrective action, adversely classified where 
appropriate and that provisions are made where necessary.  Categorization of the credit 
portfolio by credit characteristics, risk rating and regular review of individual and groups of 
credits within the portfolio and independent internal credit inspections or audits are integral 
elements of effective and prudent portfolio monitoring and control. 
 
2.4.1 Credit Administration Policies 
 
Credit administration is a critical element in maintaining the safety and soundness of a bank. 
Once a credit is granted, it is the responsibility of the bank to ensure that the credit is 
properly maintained. This includes keeping the credit file up to date, obtaining current 
financial information, sending out renewal notices and preparing various documents such as 
loan agreements.  In larger banks4, the responsibility for credit administration may be split 
among different departments, but in smaller banks these responsibilities may be assigned to 
individuals. Where individuals perform such sensitive functions as custody of key 
documents, entering credit limits into the computer database etc, they should report to 
managers who are independent of the business origination and credit approval processes.  In 
some cases where this is practically difficult, banks shall devise ways and means by which 
related risks shall be minimized. In developing credit administration arrangements, banks 
should ensure: 
 
• the efficiency and effectiveness of credit administration operations, including monitoring 
of credits, maintenance of adequate documentation, observance of contractual 
obligations and legal covenants and maintenance of collateral, etc.;  
• the accuracy and timeliness of information generated by management information 
systems; 
• the effectiveness of the  segregation of duties; 
• the adequacy of controls over all “back office” procedures; and 
• compliance with prescribed management policies and procedures as well as applicable 
laws and regulations. 
 
2.4.2 Credit Files 
 
The credit files of a bank should include all the information necessary to ascertain the 
current financial condition of counterparties as well as sufficient information to track the 
                                                          
 
4 The NBE considers banks with total assets greater than Birr 9 billion as large, between Birr 3 billion and 
Birr 9 billion as mid-size, and less than Birr 3 billion as small. 
          
              
 
 
 
Bank Supervision Directorate 
 
May 2010 
10
decisions made and credit history of borrowers. Each credit file needs at a minimum 
information that:  
 
• identifies the borrower by name and occupation or type of business, and identifies 
guarantors and connected parties; 
• provides evidence of the borrower’s legal ability to borrow, financial condition and the 
ability to repay, including the timing and source of repayment; 
• describes the terms of the credit obligation, including the purpose of the credit; 
• describes and evaluates the collateral, indicating the marketability and/or condition 
thereof; and  
• provides a history of the credit, including copies of the most recent credit authorization 
and internal credit reviews and evidence of the level of approval. 
 
2.4.3 Credit Monitoring Procedures 
 
Banks need to develop and implement comprehensive procedures and information systems 
for monitoring the condition of individual counterparties across the bank’s various 
portfolios. These procedures should define the criteria for identifying and reporting potential 
problem credits and other transactions to ensure that they are subject to more frequent 
monitoring, corrective action, and proper classification/provisioning.  An effective credit 
monitoring system will include measures to: 
 
• ensure that the bank understands the current financial condition of the counterparty; 
• monitor actual exposures against established limits; 
• monitor compliance with existing covenants; 
• assess, where applicable, collateral coverage relative to the obligor’s current condition; 
• identify contractual payment delinquencies and classify potential problem credits on a 
timely basis;  
• determine if payments are being made from the source that was anticipated at the time 
the credit was approved; and  
• direct promptly problems for remedial management. 
 
Specific individuals should be responsible for monitoring credit quality; including ensuring 
that relevant information is passed to those responsible for assigning internal risk ratings to 
the credit. In addition, individuals should be made responsible for monitoring on an ongoing 
basis any underlying collateral and guarantees. Such monitoring will assist the bank in 
making necessary changes to contractual arrangements as well as maintaining adequate 
reserves for credit losses.  
 
Banks should develop an adequate framework for managing their exposure in off-balance 
sheet products as a part of overall credit to an individual customer and subject them to the 
same credit appraisal, limits and monitoring procedures. Banks should classify their off-
balance sheet exposures into three broad categories:  
 
• full risk (credit substitutes) – e.g. standby letters of credit or money guarantees; 
          
              
 
 
 
Bank Supervision Directorate 
 
May 2010 
11
• medium risk (not direct credit substitutes) – e.g. bid bonds, indemnities and warranties; 
and  
• low risk – e.g. cash against document (CAD). 
 
2.4.4 Internal Risk Rating 
 
An important tool in monitoring the quality of individual credits, as well as the total 
portfolio, is the use of an internal risk rating system.  A well-structured internal risk rating 
system is a good means of differentiating the degree of credit risk in the different credit 
exposures of a bank. This will allow more accurate determination of the overall 
characteristics of the credit portfolio, problem credits, and the adequacy of loan loss 
reserves.  Detailed and sophisticated internal risk rating systems can also be used to 
determine internal capital allocation, pricing of credits, and profitability of transactions and 
relationships. 
 
2.4.5 Stress Testing  
 
An important element of sound credit risk management involves discussing what could 
potentially go wrong with individual credits and within the various credit portfolios, and 
considering this information in the analysis of the adequacy of capital and provisions. This 
exercise can reveal previously undetected areas of potential credit risk exposure. The linkages 
between different categories of risk that are likely to emerge in times of crisis should be fully 
understood.  In case of adverse circumstances, there may be a substantial correlation of 
various risks. Scenario analysis and stress testing are useful ways of assessing areas of 
potential problems. 
Stress testing should involve identifying possible events or future changes in economic 
conditions that could have unfavorable effects on a bank’s credit exposures and assessing the 
bank’s ability to withstand such changes. Three areas that banks could usefully examine are:  
(i) local or international economic or industry downturns; (ii) market-risk events; and (iii) 
liquidity conditions.  Stress testing can range from relatively simple alterations in 
assumptions about one or more financial, structural or economic variables, to the use of 
highly sophisticated financial models.   
 
Whatever the method of stress testing used, the output of the tests should be reviewed 
periodically by senior management and appropriate action taken in cases where the results 
exceed agreed tolerances.  The output should also be incorporated into the process for 
assigning and updating policies and limits. 
 
2.4.6 Managing Problem Loans 
 
Banks must have a system in place for early remedial action on deteriorating credits, 
managing problem credits and similar workout situations. 
 
One reason for establishing a systematic credit review process is to identify weakened or 
problem credits. A reduction in credit quality should be recognized at an early stage when 
there may be more options available for improving the credit. Banks must have disciplined 
          
              
 
 
 
Bank Supervision Directorate 
 
May 2010 
12
and vigorous remedial management process, triggered by specific events, that are 
administered through the credit administration and problem recognition systems. 
 
A bank’s credit risk policies should clearly set out how the bank will manage problem credits.  
Banks should document how various courses of actions should be applied. These include 
renewal, and extension of impaired credit facilities. The procedures should clearly set out 
authority limits within the organization that will have responsibility to make such decisions 
and how standard credit approval practices will be enhanced in the case of impaired credit.  
 
2.4.7 Management Information System and Measuring Credit Risk 
 
Banks should establish management information systems and analytical techniques that 
enable management to measure the credit risk inherent in all on- and off-balance sheet 
activities. The effectiveness of a bank’s risk measurement process is highly dependent on the 
quality of its management information systems since this information is used by the board 
and management to fulfill their respective oversight roles. Therefore, the quality, detail and 
timeliness of information are critical. The information system should provide adequate 
information on the composition of the credit portfolio, including identification of any 
concentrations of risk. The measurement of risk should take into consideration: 
 
• the specific nature of the credit (loan, guarantee, etc) as well as its contractual and 
financial conditions (maturity, rate, etc.); 
• the exposure to potential market movements; 
• the existence of collateral or guarantees; and  
• the potential for default based on internal risk rating. 
 
The analysis of credit risk data should be undertaken at an appropriate frequency with the 
results reviewed against relevant limits. Banks should use measurement techniques that are 
appropriate to the complexity and level of the risks involved in their activities, based on 
robust data, and subject to periodic validation. 
 
In particular, information on the composition and quality of the various portfolios, including 
on a consolidated bank basis, should permit management to assess quickly and accurately the 
level of credit risk that the bank has incurred through its various activities and determine 
whether the bank’s performance is within the tolerance limits of the credit risk strategy. 
 
It is important that banks have a management information system in place to ensure that 
exposures approaching risk limits are brought to the attention of senior management. All 
exposures should be included in a risk limit measurement system. The bank’s information 
system should be able to aggregate credit exposures to individual borrowers and 
counterparties and report on exceptions to credit risk limits on a meaningful and timely 
basis. 
 
2.5 Internal Controls  
 
          
              
 
 
 
Bank Supervision Directorate 
 
May 2010 
13
Banks must establish a system of independent, ongoing assessment of their credit risk 
management processes and the results of such reviews should be communicated directly to 
the board of directors and senior management. 
 
The bank should have an efficient internal review and reporting system as an effective 
oversight mechanism in respect of its credit function. This system should provide the board 
of directors and senior management with sufficient information to evaluate the performance 
of account or relationship officers and the condition of the credit portfolio. 
 
Internal credit reviews conducted by individuals independent from the business function 
provide an important assessment of individual credits and the overall quality of the credit 
portfolio.  Such a credit review function can help evaluate the overall credit administration 
process, determine the accuracy of internal risk ratings and judge how effectively credits are 
being monitored. The credit review function should report directly to the board of directors, 
a board committee with audit responsibilities, or senior management without lending 
authority (e.g., senior management within the risk control function.) 
 
The goal of credit risk management is to maintain a bank’s credit risk exposure within 
parameters set by the board of directors and senior management. The establishment and 
enforcement of internal controls, operating limits and other practices will help ensure that 
credit risk exposures do not exceed levels acceptable to the individual bank.  Such a system 
will enable bank management to monitor adherence to the established credit risk objectives. 
Internal audits of the credit risk processes should be conducted on a periodic basis. They 
should be used to confirm that :  
 
• credits have been granted in compliance with the bank’s credit policies and procedures;  
• periodic reports on all the exposures are available to senior management and are 
submitted to the board; 
• weaknesses in the credit risk management process are identified and reported to the 
board; and 
• exceptions to established policies and procedures are reported to the board. 
 
 
 
3.  LIQUIDITY RISK MANAGEMENT GUIDELINES 
 
3.1 Introduction   
  
Determining what is adequate liquidity for banking organizations has always been a rather 
subjective and difficult task, because banks rarely have liquidity problems as long as they are 
viewed as sound and deposit inflows are positive. Failure to properly manage liquidity can 
quickly result in significant unanticipated losses. The purpose of liquidity management is to 
ensure that every bank is able to meet fully its contractual commitments. The ability to fund 
increases in assets and meet obligations as they come due is critical to the ongoing viability 
of any bank. Therefore, managing liquidity is among the most important activities conducted 
by banks.  
 
          
              
 
 
 
Bank Supervision Directorate 
 
May 2010 
14
Sound liquidity management can reduce the probability of serious problems. Indeed, the 
importance of liquidity transcends the individual bank, since a liquidity shortfall at a single 
bank can have system-wide repercussions. For this reason, the analysis of liquidity requires 
the management of the bank not only to measure the liquidity position of the bank on an 
ongoing basis, but also to examine how funding requirements are likely to evolve under 
various scenarios, including adverse conditions. Banks should review frequently the 
assumptions utilized in managing liquidity to determine that they continue to be valid. Since 
a bank’s future liquidity position will be affected by factors that cannot always be forecasted 
with precision, assumptions need to be reviewed frequently to determine their continuing 
validity. These assumptions should be made under the different categories of assets, 
liabilities and off-balance sheet activities. 
   
3.2 Board and Senior Management Oversight 
 
The prerequisite of an effective liquidity risk management includes a well-informed board, 
capable management and staff having relevant expertise, and efficient systems and 
procedures. 
 
3.2.1 Board Oversight 
 
Primarily, it is the duty of the board of directors to understand the liquidity risk profile of the 
bank and the tools used to manage liquidity risk. The board has to ensure that the bank has 
necessary liquidity risk management framework and is capable of confronting uneven 
liqudity scenarios. The board should approve the strategy and significant policies related to 
overall management of liquidity. Generally, the board shall: 
 
• approve broad business strategies and policies that govern or influence the management 
of liquidity risk of the bank; 
• establish tolerance levels in respect of liquidity risk; 
• establish clear levels of delegation within the liquidity management function;  
• ensure that senior management has a full understanding of the liquidity risk incurred by 
the bank; 
• ensure that the bank’s management adopts procedures to enable the achievement of the 
objectives set out in the strategy and policies; 
• ensure that liquidity risk is adequately measured, monitored and controlled effectively 
communicate the strategies and policies to all relevant bank personnel; 
• Periodically re-evaluate significant liquidity risk management policies as well as overall 
business strategies that affect the liquidity risk exposure of the bank; and 
• Ensures compliance with all relevant laws, regulations and NBE directives. 
 
3.2.2 Senior Management Oversight 
 
Senior management is responsible for the day-to-day management of the bank’s liquidity. To 
ensure that the bank has adequate levels of liquidity to meet its on-going operational needs, 
including at times when there are unusual demands on liquidity, senior management shall: 
 
          
              
 
 
 
Bank Supervision Directorate 
 
May 2010 
15
• develop procedures and practices that facilitate the implementation of the broad liquidity 
management strategy and policies adopted by the board;  
• undertake the management of liquidity risk in accordance with the delegated authority 
developed by the board; 
• develop measures that facilitate the measurement, monitoring and control of liquidity 
risk; 
• implement a system of internal controls that serve as an effective check over the 
measures used to manage liquidity risk; 
• ensure that internal audit reviews the liquidity risk management system on an on-going 
basis; 
• ensure compliance with any relevant NBE directives on the management of liquidity risk 
• develop effective contingency plans to provide the bank with liquidity under adverse 
conditions;   
• develop lines of communication to ensure the timely dissemination of liquidity  
management policies and other liquidity risk management information to all individuals 
involved in the process; and 
• develop an effective system of reporting to the board on issues related to the 
management of liquidity risk.   
 
The responsibility for managing the overall liquidity of the bank should be placed with a 
specific, identified group within the bank, normally in the form of an asset liability 
committee (ALCO) that comprises senior management and the treasury function.  The 
ALCO is charged with ensuring that the bank has enough financial resources to function in a 
profitable, sound and sustainable manner. This includes the responsibility to ensure that the 
banks can fund desired levels of asset growth while meeting all liabilities as they become due 
and without incurring unreasonable cost in doing so. The NBE requires the board of 
directors of each bank to constitute an ALCO, which establish broad guidelines on the 
bank’s tolerance for risk, among others. All proceedings of the committee should be 
properly recorded. 
 
3.3   Policies and Procedures 
 
Banks are expected to create policies and procedures to give effect to the liquidity 
management strategy developed by the board. The policies and procedures should:  
• reflect the tolerance limits for liquidity risk established by the board;  
• establish the distribution of responsibilities for the management of the various 
components of liquidity risk with a clear statement of the levels of authority necessary to 
undertake specific functions; 
• clearly establish the duties and responsibilities of the bank’s ALCO; and 
• cleary set out a contingency measures that are in place to ensure that the banks shall have 
access to adequate liquidity especially in times of crisis.  
 
Banks should set and regularly review limits on the size of their liquidity positions over 
particular time horizons. Institutions should analyze the likely impact of different stress 
scenarios on their liquidity position and set their limits accordingly.  Limits should be 
appropriate to the size, complexity and financial condition of the bank.  Management should 
          
              
 
 
 
Bank Supervision Directorate 
 
May 2010 
16
also define the specific procedures and approvals necessary for exceptions to policies and 
limits. Limits could be set, for example, on the following: 
 
• cumulative cash flow mismatches (i.e., the cumulative net funding requirement as a 
percentage of total liabilities) over particular period – next day, next five days, next 
month etc. These mismatches should be calculated by taking a conservative view in all 
possible events, and should include likely outflows as a result of draw down of 
commitments etc; and 
• liquid assets as a percentage of short-term liabilities.  Again, there should be a discount 
to reflect possible stress scenarios due to adverse events. The assets included in this 
category should only be those that are highly liquid – i.e., only cash, cash equivalent or 
those judged to have a ready market even in periods of stress. 
 
There should be a clear indication of the specific procedures and approvals necessary for 
exceptions to policies, limits and authorizations. 
 
Banks are also expected to comply strictly with National Bank of Ethiopia’s minimum 
requirements on liquid assets holdings and reserve requirements. Banks should not classify 
assets that are being used as collateral in any form. (i.e. assets that are pledged as security 
against advances) as liquid assets.  
 
3.4   Measuring, Monitoring and Control  
 
3.4.1 Measurement 
 
At a very basic level, liquidity measurement involves assessing all of a bank’s cash inflows 
against its outflows to identify the potential for any net shortfalls going forward.  This 
includes funding requirements for off-balance sheet commitments.  A number of techniques 
can be used for measuring liquidity risk, ranging from simple calculations and static 
simulations based on current holdings to highly sophisticated modeling techniques.  As all 
banks are affected by changes in the economic climate and market conditions, the 
monitoring of economic and market trends is key to liquidity risk management. 
 
An important aspect of managing liquidity is making assumptions about future funding 
needs.  While certain cash inflows and outflows can be easily calculated or predicted, banks 
must also make assumptions about future liquidity needs, both in the very short-term and 
for longer time periods. Cash inflows arise from maturing assets, saleable non-maturing 
assets, access to deposit liabilities, established credit lines that can be tapped etc.  These cash 
inflows must be matched against cash outflows stemming from decrease in liabilities due and 
settlement of contingent liabilities.  Banks should also have some level of preparedness to 
meet cash outflows that arise from unexpected events. 
 
A maturity ladder is a useful device to compare cash inflows and outflows both on a day-to-
day basis and over a series of specified time periods.  The analysis of net funding 
requirements involves the construction of a maturity ladder and the calculation of a 
cumulative net excess or deficit of funds at selected maturity dates.  A bank’s net funding 
requirements are determined by analyzing its future cash flows based on assumptions of the 
          
              
 
 
 
Bank Supervision Directorate 
 
May 2010 
17
future behavior of assets, liabilities and off-balance-sheet items, and then calculating the 
cumulative net excess or shortfall over the time frame for the liquidity assessment. 
 
In constructing the maturity ladders, a bank has to allocate each cash inflow or outflow to a 
given calendar date from a starting point, usually the next day.  (A bank must be clear about 
the clearing and settlement conventions and timeframes it is using to assign cash flows to 
particular calendar dates).  As a preliminary step to constructing the maturity ladder, cash 
inflows can be ranked by the date on which assets mature.  Similarly, cash outflows can be 
ranked by the date on which liabilities fall due, the earliest date a liability holder could 
exercise an early repayment option, or the earliest date contingencies can be called.  Readily 
marketable assets may be “slotted in” to the earliest point in the maturity ladder at which 
they could be liquidated.  Banks should consider what discount should be applied to assets 
which are “slotted in” in this way in order to reflect market risks.  Significant interest and 
other cash flows should also be included.  In addition, certain assumptions can be made 
based on past experiences.  The difference between cash inflows and cash outflows in each 
period, the excess or deficit of funds, becomes a starting-point for a measure of a bank’s 
future liquidity excess or shortfall at a series of points in time. 
 
The relevant time frame for active liquidity management can be quite short, including intra-
day cash flows.  In particular, the first days in any liquidity problem are crucial to maintaining 
stability. The appropriate time frame shall depend on the nature of the bank’s business.  
Bank’s, which are reliant on short-term funding, shall concentrate primarily on managing 
their liquidity in the very short term (say the period up to five days). Ideally, these banks 
should be able to calculate their liquidity position on a day-to-day basis for this period.  
Other banks (i.e., those that are less dependent on the short term funds might actively 
manage their net funding requirements over a slightly longer period, perhaps one to three 
months ahead. 
 
3.4.2 Management Information System 
 
Every bank must have adequate information systems for measuring, monitoring, controlling 
and reporting on liquidity risk.  Reports should be provided on a timely basis to the bank’s 
board of directors, senior management and other appropriate personnel. A strong 
management information system (MIS) that is flexible enough to deal with various 
contingencies that may arise is central to making sound decisions related to liquidity.  The 
MIS should be used to check for compliance with the bank’s established policies, procedures 
and limits and with National Bank of Ethiopia’s prudential requirements on liquidity.  The 
MIS should also enable management to evaluate the trends in the bank’s aggregate liquidity 
exposure.  Assumptions, if any, should be set out clearly so that management can evaluate 
the validity and consistency of key assumptions and understand the implications of various 
stress scenarios. 
 
3.4.3   Contingency Planning 
 
Banks should have contingency plans in place that address the strategy for handling 
unexpected liquidity problem and include procedures for making up cash flow shortfalls in 
emergency situations. As banks rely less and less on core deposits as a stable funding source 
          
              
 
 
 
Bank Supervision Directorate 
 
May 2010 
18
and rely more on other sources of funding (such as wholesale funding), the need for 
contingency plans becomes even more critical. 
 
An effective contingency plan should establish a strategy and procedures for accessing funds 
under adverse circumstances. A contingency plan should consist of several components, 
most important of which is management coordination. The plan should spell out procedures 
for ensuring that information flows are timely and uninterrupted so as to provide 
management with the tools to make an informed decision. A strategy should be adopted for 
managing the behavior of assets and liabilities so as to minimize the effects of mismatched 
cash inflows and outflows. An attempt should be made to maintain relationships with 
liability holders and plans should be made for building back-up liquidity. To the extent 
possible, these back-up facilities should be quantified and the procedures for accessing those 
facilities pre-defined. 
 
Each bank should periodically review its efforts to establish and maintain relationships with 
depositors and other liability holders to maintain the diversification of liabilities and aim to 
ensure its capacity to sell assets. A critical component of managing liquidity is assessing 
market access and understanding various funding options as well as how much funding they 
can expect to receive from the market, both under normal and adverse circumstances. Senior 
management needs to ensure that market access is being actively managed by the appropriate 
staff within the bank.  
 
3.4.4 Stress Testing  
 
For the purpose of anticipating future problems and their solutions, a bank should subject its 
liquidity position to stress tests. Evaluation of whether a bank is sufficiently liquid depends 
to a large extent on the behavior of cash flows under different conditions. Banks should 
therefore examine their liquidity positions under a number of different scenarios. Under 
each scenario, a bank should try to account for any significant positive or negative liquidity 
swings that could occur. These scenarios should take into account factors that are both 
internal (bank-specific) and external (macro-economic and market-related). While liquidity 
shall typically be managed under “normal” circumstances, the bank must also be prepared to 
manage liquidity under adverse circumstances.  
 
 
3.4.5 Foreign Currency Liquidity Management 
 
When foreign currency is used to fund a portion of domestic currency assets, banks need to 
analyze the market conditions that could affect access to the foreign currency and 
understand that foreign currency depositors may seek to withdraw their funding more 
quickly than domestic counterparties. For that reason, banks’ should assess their ability to 
access alternative sources for repaying foreign currency liabilities. In countries such as 
Ethiopia, where the national currency does not have external convertibility, maturity 
mismatches result in higher liquidity risk, since a bank may have difficulty acquiring the 
necessary amount of foreign currency in a timely manner.   
 
A bank should also have a measurement, monitoring and control system for its liquidity 
positions in major foreign currencies in which it is active.  In addition to assessing its 
          
              
 
 
 
Bank Supervision Directorate 
 
May 2010 
19
aggregate foreign currency liquidity needs and the acceptable mismatch in combination with 
its domestic currency commitments, the institution should also undertake separate analysis 
of its strategy for each currency individually. 
 
Depending on the analysis undertaken above, a bank should, where appropriate, set and 
regularly review limits on the size of its cash flow mismatches over particular time horizons 
for foreign currencies in aggregate and for each significant individual currency in which the 
bank operates. 
 
3.5 Internal Controls 
 
A bank should have an adequate system of internal controls over its liquidity risk 
management process. They should promote effective and efficient operations, reliable 
financial and regulatory reporting and compliance with relevant laws, regulations and 
prudential norms.  A fundamental component of the internal control system involves regular 
independent reviews and evaluations of the effectiveness of the system and where necessary, 
ensuring that appropriate revisions or enhancements to internal controls are made.   
 
An effective system of internal control for liquidity risk includes: 
 
• adequate processes for identifying and evaluating liquidity risk; 
• an environment that promotes strong adherence to established policies and procedures ; 
and 
• adequate information systems. 
 
Periodic reviews should be conducted to determine whether the organization complies with 
its liquidity risk management policies and procedures. Positions that exceed established limits 
should receive prompt attention of appropriate management and should be resolved 
according to the process described in approved policies.  Periodic reviews of the liquidity 
management process should also address any significant changes in the nature of 
instruments acquired, limits and internal controls that have occurred since the last review. 
 
The internal audit function should also periodically review the liquidity management process 
in order to identify any weaknesses or problems. In turn, these should be addressed by 
management in a timely and effective manner. 
 
 
 
 
4.  MARKET RISK MANAGEMENT GUIDELINES 
 
Two types of market risk factors that could be considered are: 
 
• interest rate risk; and 
• foreign exchange risk. 
 
The above risks are described further below: 
          
              
 
 
 
Bank Supervision Directorate 
 
May 2010 
20
 
4.1 Interest Rate Risk Management Guidelines 
 
4.1.1 Introduction 
 
The volume of assets and liabilities carried by banks in Ethiopia that cannot be re-priced 
easily is increasing overtime thereby exposing banks to interest rate risk. Thus this section 
deals with interest rate risk identification, measurement, monitoring and control principles 
developed based on best practices. Interest rate risk arises from movements in interest rates. 
Exposure to this risk in banking book primarily results from timing differences in the re-
pricing of assets and liabilities, both on- and off-balance sheet. In the scenario of rising 
interest rate, when liabilities re-price faster than assets, interest spread would fall and hence 
profitability of the bank would be adversely affected. Accepting this risk is a normal part of 
banking business and can be an important source of profitability. However, excessive 
interest rate risk can pose a significant threat to banks' earnings and capital base. Changes in 
interest rates affect banks' earnings by changing their net interest income and the level of 
other interest-sensitive income and operating expenses. Changes in interest rates also affect 
the underlying value of the banks' assets, liabilities and off-balance sheet instruments because 
the present value of future cash flows (and in some cases, the cash flows themselves) change 
when interest rates change.  
 
4.1.2 Sources of Interest Rate Risk 
 
Banks encounter interest rate risk in several ways. The primary and most often discussed 
form of interest rate risk arises from timing differences in the maturity (for fixed rate) and 
repricing (for floating rate) of bank assets, liabilities and off-balance-sheet positions5. 
 
 
 
 
 
4.1.3 Effects of Interest Rate Risk 
 
Changes in interest rates can have adverse effects on both banks' earnings and their 
economic value. This has given rise to two separate, but complementary, perspectives for 
assessing a bank's interest rate risk exposure. Earnings Perspective:  In the earnings 
perspective, the focus of analysis is the impact of changes in interest rates on accrual or 
reported earnings. Variation in earnings is an important focal point for interest rate risk 
analysis because reduced earnings or outright losses can threaten the financial stability of a 
                                                          
 
5 Although currently not significant for many banks in Ethiopia, Yield Curve Risk can also expose a bank to 
interest rate risk. Yield curve risk arises when unanticipated shifts of the yield curve have adverse effects on a 
bank income or underlying economic value. Another important source of interest rate risk (commonly referred 
to as basis risk), which is not applicable to Ethiopian banks due to absence of markets, arises from imperfect 
correlation in the adjustment of the rates earned and paid on different instruments with otherwise similar 
repricing characteristics. When interest rates change, these differences can give rise to unexpected changes in 
the cash flows and earnings spread between assets, liabilities and off-balance-sheet instruments of similar 
maturities or repricing frequencies. 
 
          
              
 
 
 
Bank Supervision Directorate 
 
May 2010 
21
bank by undermining its capital adequacy and by reducing market confidence. The other is 
Economic Value Perspective: Variation in interest rates can also affect the economic value 
of a bank's assets, liabilities and off-balance-sheet positions. Thus, the sensitivity of a bank's 
economic value to fluctuations in interest rates is a particularly important consideration of 
shareholders and management alike. Embedded losses: The earnings and economic value 
perspectives focus on how future changes in interest rates may affect a bank’s financial 
performance.  However, when evaluating the level of interest rate risk it is important that a 
bank should also consider the impact that past interest rates may have on future 
performance.  . 
 
4.1.4 Board and Senior Management Oversight 
 
The board of directors has the ultimate responsibility for understanding the nature and the 
level of interest rate risk taken by the bank.  At minimum the board should: 
• approve broad business strategies and policies that govern or influence the management 
interest rate risk of the bank;   
• establish  the banks’ tolerance for interest rate risk in its operations; 
• establish clear levels of delegation within the interest rate risk management function; 
• ensure that senior management has a full understanding of the risks incurred by the 
bank;  
• ensure that the bank’s management adopts procedures to enable the achievement of the 
objectives set out in the strategy and policies; 
• ensure that interest rate risk is adequately measured, monitored and controlled; 
• effectively communicate the strategies and policies to all relevant bank personnel; 
• periodically re-evaluate significant interest rate risk management policies as well as 
overall business strategies that affect the interest rate risk exposure of the bank; and  
• ensure compliance with all relevant regulations and NBE directives. 
 
The senior management is responsible for ensuring that the bank has adequate policies and 
procedures for managing interest rate risk on both a long-term and day-to-day basis and that 
it maintains clear lines of authority and responsibility for managing and controlling this risk.  
Management should: 
  
• develop procedures and practices that facilitate the implementation of the broad interest 
rate management strategy and policies adopted by the board; and  
• undertake the management of interest rate risk in accordance with the delegated 
authority developed by the board. 
• 
develop measures that shall facilitate the measurement, monitoring and control of 
interest rate risk including standards for valuing positions and measuring performance; 
• implement a system of internal controls that shall serve as an effective check over the 
measures used to manage interest rate risk; 
• ensure that internal audit reviews the interest rate risk management system on an on-
going basis; 
• ensure compliance with any relevant NBE Directive on the management of interest rate 
risk; 
          
              
 
 
 
Bank Supervision Directorate 
 
May 2010 
22
• develop lines of communication to ensure the timely dissemination of interest rate risk 
management policies and other interest rate risk management information to all 
individuals involved in the process; and 
• develop an effective system of reporting to the board on issues related to the 
management of interest rate risk. 
 
4.1.5 Policies and Procedures 
 
Banks should have clearly defined policies and procedures for limiting and controlling 
interest rate risk. These policies should be applied at bank level, as appropriate, to other units 
of the bank. Such policies and procedures should: 
 
• reflect the tolerance limits for liquidity risk established by the board;  
• identify quantitative parameters that define the level of interest rate risk acceptable for 
the bank; where appropriate, such limits should be further specified for certain types of 
instruments, portfolios and activities and should be reviewed periodically and revised as 
needed; and   
• delineate lines of responsibility and accountability over interest rate risk management 
decisions and should clearly define authorized instruments, hedging strategies and 
position-taking opportunities. 
 
There should be a clear indication of the specific procedures and approvals necessary for 
exceptions to policies, limits and authorizations. 
 
Products and activities that are new to the bank should undergo a careful pre-acquisition 
review to ensure that the bank understands their interest rate risk characteristics and can 
incorporate them into its risk management process. Thus prior to introducing a new 
product, hedging, or position-taking strategy, management should ensure that adequate 
operational procedures and risk control systems are in place. The board or its appropriate 
delegated committee should also approve major hedging or risk management initiatives in 
advance of their implementation. Proposals to undertake new instruments or new strategies 
should at least contain the following features: 
 
• 
a description of the relevant product or strategy (including characteristics related to 
interest rates); 
• 
an identification of the resources required to establish sound and effective interest rate 
risk management of the product or activity; 
• 
an analysis of the reasonableness of the proposed activities in relation to the financial 
condition and capital levels; and 
• 
the procedures to be used to measure monitor and control the risks of the proposed 
product or activity. 
 
4.1.6 Measurement, Monitoring and Control  
 
In general, but depending on the complexity and range of its activities, a bank should have 
interest rate risk measurement systems that assess the effects of rate changes on both 
          
              
 
 
 
Bank Supervision Directorate 
 
May 2010 
23
earnings and economic value. These systems should provide meaningful measures of the 
bank's current levels of interest rate risk exposure and should be capable of identifying any 
excessive exposures that might arise.  Measurement systems should: 
 
• 
assess all material interest rate risk associated with a bank's assets, liabilities and off-
balance-sheet positions; 
• 
utilize generally accepted financial concepts and risk measurement techniques; and 
• 
have well documented assumptions and parameters. 
 
4.1.6.1 Measurement Methods  
 
The following are commonly used measurement techniques for interest rate risk exposure. 
Depending on the complexity of their business, banks may use one or more of the methods 
discussed below or may even opt for other acceptable ways of measuring such risk. 
  
a) Gap analysis: The simplest techniques for measuring a bank's interest rate risk exposure 
begin with a maturity/repricing schedule that distributes interest-sensitive assets, liabilities 
and off-balance-sheet positions into “time bands” according to their maturity (if fixed rate) 
or time remaining to their next repricing (if floating rate).  These schedules can be used to 
generate simple indicators of the interest rate risk sensitivity of both earnings and economic 
value to changing interest rates.  When this approach is used to assess the interest rate risk of 
current earnings, it is typically referred to as gap analysis.  The size of the gap for a given 
time band – that is, assets minus liabilities plus off-balance-sheet exposures that reprice or 
mature within that time band – gives an indication of the bank's repricing risk exposure. 
 
b) Maturity/Repricing: schedule can also be used to evaluate the effects of changing 
interest rates on a bank's economic value by applying sensitivity weights to each time band.  
Typically, such weights are based on estimates of the assets and liabilities that fall into each 
time-band, where duration is a measure of the percent change in the economic value of a 
position that shall occur given a small change in the level of interest rates.  Duration-based 
weights can be used in combination with a maturity/repricing schedule to provide a rough 
approximation of the change in a bank's economic value that would occur given a particular 
set of changes in interest rates. 
 
c) Simulation Techniques: Banks may employ more sophisticated interest rate risk 
measurement systems than those based on simple maturity/repricing schedules such as, 
simulation techniques which typically involve detailed assessments of the potential effects 
of changes in interest rates on earnings and economic value by simulating the future path of 
interest rates and their impact on cash flows.  In static simulations, the cash flows arising 
solely from the current on-and off-balance sheet positions are assessed.  In a dynamic 
simulation approach, the simulation builds in more detailed assumptions about the future 
course of interest rates and expected changes in a bank's business activity over that time. 
These more sophisticated techniques allow for dynamic interaction of payments streams and 
interest rates, and better capture the effect of embedded or explicit options.  
 
Regardless of the measurement system, the usefulness of each technique depends on the 
validity of the underlying assumptions and the accuracy of the basic methodologies used to 
          
              
 
 
 
Bank Supervision Directorate 
 
May 2010 
24
model interest rate risk exposure. In designing interest rate risk measurement systems, banks 
should ensure that the degree of detail about the nature of their interest-sensitive positions is 
commensurate with the complexity and risk inherent in those positions.  For instance, using 
gap analysis, the precision of interest rate risk measurement depends in part on the number 
of time bands into which positions are aggregated.  Clearly, aggregation of positions/cash 
flows into broad time bands implies some loss of precision.  In practice, the bank must 
assess the significance of the potential loss of precision in determining the extent of 
aggregation and simplification to be built into the measurement approach. 
 
When measuring interest rate risk exposure, one further aspect call for more specific 
comment6: the treatment of those positions where behavioral maturity differs from 
contractual maturity. Positions such as savings and time deposits may have contractual 
maturities or may be open-ended, but in either case, depositors generally have the option to 
make withdrawals at any time.  These factors complicate the measurement of interest rate 
risk change when interest rates vary. 
 
4.1.6.2 Limits 
 
The goal of interest rate risk management is to maintain a bank's interest rate risk exposure 
within self-imposed parameters over a range of possible changes in interest rates. A system 
of interest rate risk limits and risk taking guidelines provides the means for achieving that 
goal. Such a system should set boundaries for the level of interest rate risk for the bank and 
where appropriate, should also provide the capability to allocate limits to individual 
portfolios, activities or business units. 
 
Limit systems should also ensure that positions that exceed certain predetermined levels 
receive prompt management attention. An appropriate limit system should enable 
management to control interest rate risk exposures, initiate discussion about opportunities 
and risks and monitor actual risk taking against predetermined risk tolerances. Limits should 
be consistent with overall approach to measuring interest rate risk.  Aggregate interest rate 
risk limits clearly articulating the amount of interest rate risk acceptable to the bank should 
be approved by the board of directors and re-evaluated periodically.  Such limits should be 
appropriate to the size, complexity and capital adequacy of the bank as well as its ability to 
measure and manage risk. 
 
Depending on the nature of a bank's activities and its general sophistication, limits can also 
be identified with individual business unit, portfolios, instrument types or specific 
instruments.  The level of detail of risk limits should reflect the characteristics of the bank's 
activities including the various sources of interest rate risk to which the bank is exposed. 
 
4.1.6.3 Stress Testing 
 
The risk measurement system should also support a meaningful evaluation of the effect of 
changes in interest rate that negatively affect the bank’s conditions. Stress testing should be 
                                                          
 
6 In principle, one may also add the treatment of positions denominated in different currencies. This, 
however, is not applicable to Ethiopian banks at present since they are not allowed to borrow or lend in 
foreign currency. 
          
              
 
 
 
Bank Supervision Directorate 
 
May 2010 
25
designed to provide information on the kinds of conditions under which the bank's 
strategies or positions would be most vulnerable and thus may be tailored to the risk 
characteristics of the bank. Possible stress scenarios might include abrupt changes in the 
general level of interest rates, changes in the volatility of market rates. In addition, stress 
scenarios should include conditions under which key business assumptions and parameters 
break down. The stress testing of assumptions used for illiquid instruments and instruments 
with uncertain contractual maturities is particularly critical to achieving an understanding of 
the bank's risk profile. In conducting stress tests, special consideration should be given to 
instruments or markets where concentrations exist as such positions may be more difficult to 
liquidate or offset in stressful situations.  Banks should consider “worst case” scenarios in 
addition to more probable events. Management and the board of directors should 
periodically review both the design and the results of such stress tests, and ensure that 
appropriate contingency plans are in place. 
 
4.1.7 Management Information System 
 
Banks must have adequate information systems for measuring, monitoring, controlling and 
reporting interest rate exposures.  Reports must be provided on a timely basis to the board 
of directors, senior management and, where appropriate, individual business line managers. 
 
An accurate, informative, and timely management information system is essential for 
managing interest rate risk exposure, both to inform management and to support 
compliance with board policy.  Reporting of risk measures should be regular and should 
clearly compare current exposure to policy limits.  In addition, past forecasts or risk 
estimates should be compared with actual results to identify any modeling shortcomings. 
 
Reports detailing the interest rate risk exposure of the bank should be reviewed by senior 
management and the board on a regular basis. While the types of reports prepared for the 
board and for various levels of management shall vary based on the bank's interest rate risk 
profile, they should, at a minimum include the following: 
 
• 
summaries of the bank's aggregate exposures; 
• 
reports demonstrating the bank's compliance with policies and limits; 
• 
results of stress tests including those assessing breakdown in key assumptions and 
parameters; and 
• 
summaries of the findings of reviews of interest rate risk policies, procedures, and 
the adequacy of the interest rate risk measurement systems, including any findings of 
internal and external auditors and consultants. 
4.1.8 
Internal Controls 
 
Banks should have adequate internal controls to ensure the integrity of their interest rate risk 
management process which (as an integral part of the bank’s overall internal control) 
promote effective and efficient operations, reliable financial and regulatory reporting, and 
compliance with National Bank of Ethiopia’s prudential requirements.  An effective system 
of internal control for interest rate risk includes: 
 
• 
a strong control environment; 
          
              
 
 
 
Bank Supervision Directorate 
 
May 2010 
26
• 
an adequate process for identifying and evaluating risk; 
• 
the establishment of control activities such as policies, procedures and 
methodologies; 
• 
adequate information systems; and 
• 
continual review of adherence to established policies and procedures. 
 
With regard to control policies and procedures, attention should be given to appropriate 
approval processes, exposure limits, reconciliation, reviews and other mechanisms designed 
to provide a reasonable assurance that the bank's interest rate risk management objectives 
are achieved. Banks should ensure that all aspects of the internal control system are effective, 
including those aspects that are not directly part of the risk management process. 
 
In addition, an important element of a bank's internal control system over its interest rate 
risk management process is regular evaluation and review.  This includes ensuring that 
personnel are following established policies and procedures, as well as ensuring that the 
procedures that were established actually accomplish the intended objectives.   
 
The frequency and extent to which a bank should re-evaluate its risk measurement 
methodologies and models depends, in part, on the particular interest rate risk exposures 
created by holdings and activities, the pace and nature of interest rate changes, and the pace 
and complexity of innovation with respect to measuring and managing interest rate risk. 
 
Banks, particularly those with complex risk exposures, should have their measurement, 
monitoring and control functions review on a regular basis by an independent party (such as 
an internal or external auditor). Such a reviewer should consider the following factors in 
making the risk assessment:  
 
• the quantity of interest rate risk, e.g. 
o the volume and price sensitivity of various products, and 
o the vulnerability of earnings, economic value and capital under differing rate 
changes; and 
• the quality of interest rate risk management, e.g. 
o whether the bank’s internal measurement system is appropriate to the nature, 
scope, and complexities of the bank and its activities, 
o whether the bank has an independent risk management unit responsible for the 
design and administration of the risk measurement, monitoring and control 
functions, 
o whether the board of directors and senior management is actively involved in the 
risk control process, 
o whether internal policies, controls and procedures concerning interest rate risk 
are well documented and complied with, 
o whether the assumptions of the risk measurement system are well documented, 
data accurately processed, and data aggregation is proper and reliable, and 
o whether the organization has adequate staffing to conduct a sound risk 
management process.  
 
          
              
 
 
 
Bank Supervision Directorate 
 
May 2010 
27
Banks should ensure that internal audit reviews and evaluates the interest rate risk 
management function. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4.2 Foreign Exchange Rate Risk Management 
 
4.2.1 Introduction 
 
Exposure to this risk mainly occurs during a period in which the bank has a foreign currency 
open position, both on- and off-balance sheet, in spot markets. It is a risk of volatility due to 
a mismatch, and may cause a bank to experience losses as a result of adverse exchange rate 
movements during a period in which it has an open on or off-balance sheet position in an 
individual foreign currency. Movements in exchange rates may adversely affect the value of a 
bank's foreign currency open positions. Currently, banks are allowed to take open positions 
in foreign currencies subject to regulatory limits set by the NBE. The potential for loss arises 
          
              
 
 
 
Bank Supervision Directorate 
 
May 2010 
28
from the process of revaluing foreign currency positions in Birr terms. When banks have an 
open position in a foreign currency (where assets in a currency do not equal liabilities in that 
currency), the process of revaluation normally shall result in a gain or loss. The gain or loss is 
the difference between the aggregate change in the Birr equivalent value of assets 
denominated in the foreign currency and the aggregate change in the value of liabilities and 
capital denominated in that currency. 
 
Whether the bank incurs a gain or a loss depends upon both the direction of the exchange 
rate change and whether the bank is net long or net short in the foreign currency.  When the 
bank has a net long position in the currency, revaluation shall produce a gain if the value of 
the currency increases. A loss results if the value of the currency decreases. Conversely, a net 
short position shall produce a loss if the foreign currency’s value increases. A gain results if it 
decreases.  
 
4.2.2 
Board and Senior Management Oversight 
 
The Board of Directors is ultimately responsible for the bank's exposure to foreign exchange 
risk and the level of risk assumed.  The board should:  
 
• approve broad business strategies and policies that govern or influence the management 
of foreign exchange rate risk of the bank; 
• establish tolerance levels in respect of foreign exchange rate risk;  
• establish clear levels of delegation within the foreign exchange management function; 
• ensure that senior management has a full understanding of the foreign exchange rate risk 
incurred by the bank;  
• ensure that the bank has adequate human and physical resources for the management of 
foreign exchange rate risk ; 
• establish a proper organizational structure for foreign exchange rate risk management 
function;  
• establish clear levels of delegation for issues related to the management of foreign 
exchange rate risk management;  
• ensure that the bank’s management adopts procedures to enable the achievement of the 
objectives set out in the strategy and policies; 
• ensure that foreign exchange risk is adequately measured, monitored and controlled 
• effectively communicate the strategies and policies to all relevant bank personnel; and 
• periodically re-evaluate significant risk management policies as well as overall business 
strategies that affect the foreign exchange rate risk exposure of the bank. 
 
Senior management is responsible for the day-to-day management of the bank’s exposure to 
foreign exchange risk. Senior management should: 
 
• develop procedures and practices that facilitate the implementation of the broad foreign 
exchange rate risk management strategy and policies adopted by the board;  
• undertake the management of foreign exchange rate risk in accordance with the 
delegated authority developed by the board; 
          
              
 
 
 
Bank Supervision Directorate 
 
May 2010 
29
• develop measures that shall facilitate the measurement, monitoring and control of 
foreign exchange rate risk; 
• implement a system of internal controls that shall serve as an effective check over the 
measures used to manage foreign exchange rate risk; 
• ensure that internal audit reviews the foreign exchange rate risk management system on 
an on-going basis;  
• ensure compliance with any relevant NBE directives on the management of foreign 
exchange rate risk; 
• develop lines of communication to ensure the timely dissemination of foreign exchange 
risk management policies and other foreign exchange rate risk management information 
to all individuals involved in the process; and 
• develop an effective system of reporting to the board on issues related to the 
management of foreign exchange rate risk.   
 
4.2.3    Policies and Procedures  
 
Banks should have written policies governing activities in foreign currencies. The purpose of 
these written policies is to communicate the expectations of senior management and the 
board of directors to the management and staff. The policies should be reviewed and 
approved by the board of directors.   
 
For management and control purposes, banks must make a clear distinction between foreign 
currency exposure resulting from dealing and trading operations and exposures due to a 
more traditional banking business involving on and off-balance-sheet exposures 
denominated in a foreign currency. Currency risk management involving dealing/trading 
operations must be an information-intensive, day-in/day-out process under close scrutiny by 
senior management and a risk management committee. 
 
In general, policies and procedures should:  
 
• reflect the tolerance limits for foreign exchange risk established by the board;  
• determine, within the limitation set by law, the types of foreign exchange products and 
services that the bank shall provide and the intended scope of dealing activity;  
• adequately measure, monitor and control foreign exchange risk;  
• establish limits to govern various  aspects of the management of the foreign exchange 
operations including: 
o net open position limits by currency, and for all currencies combined at the end of 
the day (overnight limit) and at any time during the day (intra-day limit), using an 
acceptable aggregation method,   
o limits on counterparty exposure, and 
o settlement limits, (both outright and within the context of counterparty exposure 
limits); and 
• establish rules for accounting standards that should be used in revaluing foreign currency 
positions and the frequency with which such revaluations should be undertaken for 
management and accounting purposes.  
 
          
              
 
 
 
Bank Supervision Directorate 
 
May 2010 
30
There should be a clear indication of the specific procedures and approvals necessary for 
exceptions to policies, limits and authorizations. 
 
For accounting purposes, revaluations generally should be performed at the time of any 
required periodic reporting to the National Bank of Ethiopia. For management information 
purposes, more frequent revaluations should be performed, depending on the size and 
relevance of the foreign currency positions. Finally, the policies should establish revaluation 
standards that preclude the deferral of losses on foreign exchange positions for internal 
reporting purposes. 
 
4.2.3 
 Measuring Monitoring and Control  
 
The potential loss that an open position might produce should be estimated. To directly 
estimate loss potential, management determines the size of the loss that would be incurred 
should the exchange rate moves against the bank's open position. To make this estimate, 
management makes one or several assumptions about potential adverse exchange rate 
movements. It computes the loss that would be incurred by revaluing the banks open 
position at this hypothetical exchange rate. The size of the potential loss produced in this 
manner is subjected to a limit. The limit might be expressed in terms of the nominal amount 
of the loss, or in terms of a certain percentage of a benchmark, such as projected earnings or 
total capital. Normally, management’s principal goal is to provide strong assurance that 
foreign exchange losses shall not substantively diminish the total earnings of the bank. 
 
4.2.4 Management Information System 
 
Accurate and timely information systems are critical to the management of foreign currency 
positions, and for ensuring compliance with relevant risk limits.  Banks should devote the 
resources necessary to generating such information.  Standardized reports should be 
designed to communicate the information regarding open foreign exchange positions, 
liquidity positions and counterparty exposures.  Positions and exposures should be prepared 
and verified by persons not responsible for transacting foreign currency business. 
 
At the minimum, reports available should include: 
 
• net overall and intra-day positions by currency; 
• maturity distribution by currency of foreign currency assets, liabilities and off-balance 
sheet contracts; 
• outstanding contracts by settlement date and currency; 
• total value of outstanding contracts, at spot rate; 
• profit and loss, totals and comparison to previous day’s; 
• market value of off-balance sheet accounts; 
• aggregate dealing limits; and 
• limit or line excesses. 
. 
4.2.5   Internal Controls  
 
          
              
 
 
 
Bank Supervision Directorate 
 
May 2010 
31
Banks should implement a system of internal controls to ensure that their arrangements for 
managing foreign exchange rate risk are working effectively. The system should ensure that 
the bank’s foreign exchange activities are undertaken within the prescribed risk tolerance 
limits, and that all established procedures, and practices are being followed. 
 
The internal audit function of the bank should review and assess the foreign exchange risk 
management process. It shall also be necessary for management to establish and implement 
procedures governing the conduct and practices of foreign exchange traders/dealers. The 
internal audit should ensure that foreign exchange traders/dealers observe their instructions 
and the code of behavior required of them and that accounting procedures meet the 
necessary standards of accuracy, promptness and completeness. 
 
The board audit committee can greatly enhance the quality of reports and the reasonableness 
of foreign exchange risk management information supplied to the board, the management 
and the NBE. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5.  OPERATIONAL RISK MANAGEMENT GUIDELINES 
 
5.1 Introduction 
 
Operational risk includes the exposure to loss resulting from the failure of a manual or 
automated system to process, produce or analyze transactions in an accurate, timely and 
secure manner. This risk therefore is imbedded in all of the bank's operations, including 
those supporting the management of other risks. Managing operational risk is an important 
feature of sound risk management practice in any bank. The exact approach chosen by an 
individual bank shall depend on a range of factors, including its size and sophistication and 
          
              
 
 
 
Bank Supervision Directorate 
 
May 2010 
32
the nature and complexity of its activities. The most important types of operational risk 
involve breakdowns in internal systems and controls and corporate governance. Such 
breakdowns can often lead to financial losses through error, fraud or inefficiency. Other 
aspects of operational risk include major failure of information technology systems or events 
such as natural and other disasters. As banks become more reliant on technology to support 
various aspects of their operations, the potential failure of a technology based system is of 
growing concern in the context of the management of operational risk.  
Operational risk can also give rise to reputational and legal risks as the types of failures 
outlined above can result in damage to an institution’s reputation and/or legal action by 
regulators or customers. A computer system’s failure within a bank, for example, can result 
in damage to its reputation and could also lead to the imposition of fines or other actions by 
regulators if the failure causes the bank to be in breach of laws or regulations. Thus, for the 
purpose of these Guidelines, IT, legal, regulatory, strategic, reputational, and systemic risks 
are all categorized under operational risk   
 5.2 Board and Senior Management Oversight 
 
5.2.1 The Board 
 
The Board of directors should address operational risk explicitly as a distinct and 
controllable risk to the bank's safety and soundness.  Failure to address operational risk, 
which is present in virtually all banking transactions and activities, may greatly increase the 
likelihood that some risks shall go unrecognized and uncontrolled.  The board should:  
 
• approve broad business strategies and policies that govern or influence the management 
of operational risk of the bank; 
• approve an operational risk strategy and policies; 
• establish clear levels of delegation within business units for the effective management of 
operational risk;  
• ensure that senior management has a full understanding of the operational risk faced by 
the bank; 
• ensure that the bank’s management adopts procedures to enable the achievement of the 
objectives set out in the strategy and policies for the management of operational risk; 
• ensure that operational risk is adequately monitored and controlled; 
• effectively communicates the strategies and policies to all relevant bank personnel; and 
• periodically re-evaluate significant risk management policies as well as overall business 
strategies that affect the operational risk exposure of the bank. 
 
5.2.3 Senior Management 
 
Senior management is responsible for the day-to-day management of the bank’s exposure to 
operational risk. Senior management should: 
 
• develop procedures and practices that facilitate the implementation of the broad 
operational risk management strategy and policies adopted by the board;  
          
              
 
 
 
Bank Supervision Directorate 
 
May 2010 
33
• undertake the management of operational risk in accordance with the delegated authority 
developed by the board; 
• develop measures that shall facilitate the measurement, monitoring and control of 
operational risk;  
• implement a system of internal controls that shall serve as an effective check over the 
measures used to manage operational risk; 
• ensure that internal audit reviews the operational risk management arrangements on an 
on-going basis;  
• ensure compliance with any relevant NBE directives on the management of operational 
risk; 
• develop lines of communication to ensure the timely dissemination of operational risk 
management policies and other operational risk management information to all 
individuals involved in the process; and 
• develop an effective system of reporting to the board on issues related to the 
management of operational risk.   
 
The primary responsibility for management of operational risk remains with individual 
business units. Business area managers are expected to ensure that appropriate operational 
risk control systems are in place. 
 
5.3     Policies and Procedures 
 
Management must translate the operational risk management strategy established by the 
board of directors into policies, processes and procedures that can be implemented and 
verified.  In general, policies and procedures should:  
 
• reflect the general philosophy in respect of operational risk as established by the board.  
• adequately measure, monitor and control operational risk; 
• establish clear responsibilities and levels of authority among management staff and 
business units for the management of operational risk; 
• ensure that the measures adopted for the management of operational risk are appropriate 
in light of the nature of the banks products, services and operational culture and 
practices; and 
• establish effective business continuity plans to ensure a quick an effective resumption of 
business following a disruption of service or activities 
 
All banks should also have policies, processes and procedures to control or mitigate 
operational risk. Banks should assess the costs and benefits of alternative risk limitation and 
control strategies and should adjust their operational risk exposure using appropriate 
strategies, in light of their overall risk profile. If necessary, new arrangements should be 
created to assist in the identification, measurement, monitoring and control of operational 
risk. In addition, there should be a formal new product review process involving business, 
risk management and internal control functions. 
 
There should be a clear indication of the specific procedures and approvals necessary for 
exceptions to policies, limits and authorizations. 
          
              
 
 
 
Bank Supervision Directorate 
 
May 2010 
34
 
5.4   Measurement Monitoring and Control  
 
Risk identification is critical for the subsequent development of viable operational risk 
measurement, monitoring and control.  Effective risk identification considers both internal 
factors (such as the complexity of the bank's structure, the nature of the bank's activities, the 
quality of personnel, organizational changes and employee turnover) and external factors 
(such as fluctuating economic conditions, changes in the industry and technological 
advances) that could adversely impact on the bank’s earnings and capital.  
 
Measuring operational risk requires both estimating the probability of an operational loss 
event and the potential size of the loss. Banks should engage in tracking operational risk 
data. Such information is fundamental to measuring, monitoring, and controlling operational 
risk exposure. For any reliable measurement system, data would need to be collected in order 
to develop general measures of operational risk. For the data collected to be useful, the 
breadth, history and integrity of the data have to be commensurate with the bank's 
operational risk profile and approach to managing risk.  
 
To measure operational risk, banks need to identify the underlying operational risk drivers or 
factors. The approach of identification generally followed is to decompose operational risk 
into those risks that are closely related to internal processes, people and systems and those 
that are more related to the external environment.  
 
5.5Monitoring  
 
All banks should implement a system to monitor, on an on-going basis, operational risk 
exposures and loss events by major business lines. Banks should monitor operational losses 
directly, and should analysis each occurrence and a description of the nature and causes of 
loss provided to senior managers and the board of directors. Ongoing monitoring activities 
offer the advantage of quickly detecting and correcting deficiencies in the policies, processes 
and procedures for managing operational risk.   
 
The frequency of monitoring should reflect the risks involved and the frequency and nature 
of changes in the operating environment. Monitoring is most effective when the system of 
internal control is integrated into the bank's operations and produces regular reports. The 
results of these monitoring activities should be included in management and board reports, 
as should compliance reviews performed by internal or external audit. A good management 
information system should be able to capture and report operational risk. 
 
5.6 Internal Controls  
 
In mitigating or reducing operational risk, the value of internal controls is very critical. 
Internal controls should be seen as the major tool for managing operational risk. The 
controls cited include the full range of control activities such as segregation of duties, clear 
management reporting lines and adequate operating procedures. In most cases, operational 
risk events are associated with internal control weaknesses or lack of compliance with 
existing internal control procedures.    
 
          
              
 
 
 
Bank Supervision Directorate 
 
May 2010 
35
Control activities should be designed and implemented to address the risks that the bank has 
identified. Control processes and procedures should be established and all banks should 
have a system in place for ensuring compliance with documented set of internal policies 
concerning the risk management system. Principal elements of this should include: 
 
• top-level reviews of the bank's  progress towards the stated objectives; 
• checking for compliance with management controls; 
• policies, processes and procedures concerning the review, treatment and resolution of 
non- compliance issues; and 
• a system of documented approvals and authorizations to ensure accountability to an 
appropriate level of management. 
 
To be effective, control activities should be an integral part of the regular activities of the 
bank and should involve all levels of personnel in the bank, including both senior 
management and business unit personnel. Controls that are an integral part of the regular 
activities enable quick responses to changing conditions and avoid unnecessary costs.  
 
An effective internal control system requires that there be appropriate segregation of duties 
and that personnel in the bank are not assigned responsibilities which may create a conflict 
of interest.  Assigning such conflicting duties to individuals or a team may enable them to 
conceal losses, errors or inappropriate actions. Therefore areas of potential conflicts of 
interest should be identified, minimized and subject to careful independent monitoring and 
review. 
 
Activities of internal auditors also form an important element of operational risk 
management. In ensuring good internal controls, internal auditors would need to be 
proactive in dealing with the bank's operational weaknesses. In particular, the identification 
of potential problems, the independent validation of business management’s self- 
assessments and the tracking of problem situation and the progress towards resolving the 
problems should form major functions of the internal audit.  
 
An important role is also ascribed to external auditors, whose duties include reviewing the 
internal controls, operating procedures and systems, management information systems of the 
bank and preparing management letters that, among others, disclose deficiencies in internal 
control systems. External auditors should perform an assessment of operational risk to 
ensure that this risk is managed in a consistent way across the bank. 
 
 
 
ANNEX I: DEFINITIONS 
Credit risk is the potential that a bank borrower or counterparty will fail to meet its 
obligations in accordance with agreed terms. 
Liquidity risk is the risk that a bank cannot meet payment obligations in a timely and cost-
effective manner.  
          
              
 
 
 
Bank Supervision Directorate 
 
May 2010 
36
Market risk is the potential that changes in the market rates/process may have an adverse 
impact on the bank’s financial condition. In other words, it is the risk that the bank’s 
earnings or capital position will be affected by fluctuations in interest rate and foreign 
exchange rate.  
Interest rate risk refers to volatility in net interest income and the economic value of a 
bank’s assets, liabilities, and capital and off-balance sheet financial instruments.  
 
Foreign exchange risk results from changes in exchange rate between Birr (Ethiopia’s 
domestic currency) and currencies of the rest of the world.   
Operational risk is the risk of loss resulting from inadequate or failed internal processes, 
people and systems or from external events.  
IT risk arises from any potential adverse outcome, impairment, loss, violation, failure or 
disruption in the performance of business functions or processes due to the use of or 
reliance on technology. Exposure to this risk can result from among others, systems flaws, 
software defects and network vulnerabilities.  
Legal risk is the risk arising from the potential that unenforceable contracts, lawsuits, or 
adverse judgments can disrupt or otherwise negatively affect bank’s operations or 
conditions.  
Regulatory risk is the risk of being downgraded, fined, suspended, license revoked, etc 
arising from failure to comply with regulatory requirements or directives.  
Strategic risk refers to the potential negative impact on a bank’s earnings and capital that 
can arise in circumstances where decisions taken by the organization or the manner in which 
business strategies are executed result in losses or missed opportunities for the organization 
to remain relevant in the marketplace as a profitable and viable business entity.  
Reputational risk arises from negative publicity, be it true or not, regarding a bank’s 
business practices. 
Systemic risk refers to the danger that problems in a single financial institution might 
spread and, in extreme situations, such contagion could disrupt the normal functioning of 
the entire financial system. 
 
ANNEX II: COMPREHENSIVE RISK MANAGEMENT PROGRAM  
 
There is no single risk management system that would fit for all banks. Consequently, the 
NBE requires each bank to develop its own comprehensive risk management system tailored 
to its needs and circumstances. This risk management system, however, should at least cover 
the most common risks, indicated in these Guidelines.  
 
Moreover, each risk management system should include the following: 
          
              
 
 
 
Bank Supervision Directorate 
 
May 2010 
37
  
3.1 Risk Identification: In order to manage risks, risks must first be identified. Almost 
every product and service offered by banks has a unique risk profile composed of multiple 
risks. For example, at least four types of risks are usually present in most loans: credit risk, 
interest rate risk, liquidity risk and operational risk. Risk identification should be a continuing 
process and risk should be understood at both the transaction and portfolio levels. 
 
3.2 Risk Measurement:  Once the risks associated with a particular activity have been 
identified, the next step is to measure the significance of each risk. Each risk should be 
viewed in terms of its three dimensions: size, duration and probability of adverse 
occurrences. Accurate and timely measurement of risk is essential to effective risk 
management systems. 
 
3.3 Risk Control:  Following risk identification and measurement banks should control or 
minimize risks. There are basically three ways to control significant risks, or at least minimize 
their adverse consequences: avoiding or placing limits on certain activities/risks, mitigating 
risks and/or offsetting risks. It is a primary management function to balance expected 
rewards against risks and the expenses associated with controlling risks. Banks should 
establish and communicate risk control mechanisms through policies, standards and 
procedures that define responsibility and authority. 
 
3.4 Risk Monitoring:  Banks need to establish a management information system (MIS) 
that accurately identifies and measures risks at the inception of transactions and activities. It 
is equally important for management to establish an MIS to monitor significant changes in 
risk profiles. In general, monitoring risks means developing reporting systems that identify 
adverse changes in the risk profiles of significant products, services and activities and 
monitoring changes in controls that have been put in place to minimize adverse 
consequences. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ANNEX III: BASIC ELEMENTS OF A SOUND RISK MANAGEMENT SYSTEM  
 
Sound risk management system of each bank should at least contain the following elements: 
 
3.1 Board and Senior Management Oversight  
 
3.1.1 Board Oversight  
 
Boards of directors have ultimate responsibility for the level of risk taken by their banks. 
          
              
 
 
 
Bank Supervision Directorate 
 
May 2010 
38
Accordingly, they should approve the overall business strategies and significant policies of 
their organizations, including those related to managing and taking risks and should ensure 
that senior management is fully capable of managing the activities that their banks conduct.  
All members of board of directors are responsible for understanding the nature of the risks 
significant to their organizations and for ensuring that the management is taking the steps 
necessary to identify, measure, monitor and control these risks. The level of technical 
knowledge required of directors may vary depending on the particular circumstances at the 
bank.  Consequently, what is most important is for directors to have a clear understanding of 
the types of risks to which their banks are exposed and to receive regular reports that 
identify the size and significance of the risks in terms that are meaningful to them. Directors 
should take steps to develop an appropriate understanding of the risks their banks face, 
possibly through briefings from auditors and experts. Using this knowledge and information, 
directors should provide clear guidance regarding the level of exposures acceptable to their 
banks and have the responsibility to ensure that senior management implements the 
procedures and controls necessary to comply with adopted policies. 
 
3.1.2 Senior Management Oversight 
 
Senior management is responsible for implementing strategies in a manner that limits risks 
associated the bank’s activities. Management should therefore be fully involved in the 
activities of their banks and possess sufficient knowledge of all major business lines to 
ensure that appropriate policies, controls and risk monitoring systems are in place and that 
accountability and lines of authority are clearly delineated.  Senior management is also 
responsible for establishing and communicating a strong awareness of and need for effective 
internal controls and high ethical standards. Meeting these responsibilities requires senior 
managers of a bank to demonstrate a thorough understanding of developments in the 
financial sector and a detailed knowledge of the activities their bank conducts, including the 
nature of the internal controls necessary to limit the related risks. 
 
3.2 Policies and Procedures   
 
The board of directors and senior management should tailor their risk management policies 
and procedures to the types of risks that arise from the activities of the bank. Once the risks 
are properly identified, the bank’s policies and procedures should provide detailed guidance 
for the day-to-day implementation of broad business strategies and should include limits 
designed to shield the bank from excessive and imprudent risks. While all banks should have 
policies and procedures that address their significant activities and risks, the coverage and 
level of detail embodied in these documents shall vary among banks. Management is 
expected to ensure that policies and procedures address material areas of risk to a bank and 
that they are modified when necessary to respond to significant changes in the activities or 
business conditions of the bank.  
 
3.3 Measurement, Monitoring and Control    
 
Effective risk monitoring requires banks to identify and measure all material risk exposures. 
Consequently, risk-monitoring activities must be supported by information systems that 
provide senior managers and directors with timely and accurate reports on the financial 
condition, operating performance and risk exposure of the bank on consolidated basis. 
          
              
 
 
 
Bank Supervision Directorate 
 
May 2010 
39
 
The sophistication of risk monitoring and MIS should be consistent with the complexity and 
diversity of the bank’s operations. Every bank must have a set of management and board 
reports to support risk measuring and monitoring activities. These reports may include 
balance sheets and income statements, a watch list for potentially troubled loans, a report of 
overdue loans, simple interest rate risk report and other relevant reports. Banks are expected 
to have risk monitoring and management information systems in place that provide directors 
and senior management with a clear understanding of the banks’  risk exposures. 
 
3.4 Internal Controls   
 
A bank’s internal control structure is critical to the safe and sound functioning of the bank, 
in general and to its risk management, in particular. Establishing and maintaining an effective 
system of controls, including the enforcement of official lines of authority and the 
appropriate separation of duties is one of management’s more important responsibilities. 
Indeed, appropriately segregating duties is a fundamental and essential element of a sound 
risk management and internal control system. Failure to implement and maintain an 
adequate separation of duties can constitute an unsafe and unsound practice and possibly 
lead to serious losses or otherwise compromise the financial integrity of the bank.  Serious 
lapses or deficiencies in internal controls including inadequate segregation of duties may 
warrant supervisory action, including formal enforcement action.  
 
When properly structured, a system of internal controls promotes effective operations and 
reliable financial and regulatory reporting, safeguards assets and helps to ensure compliance 
with relevant laws, regulations and institutional policies. Given the importance of 
appropriate internal controls to banks, the results of audits or reviews, conducted by an 
internal auditor or other persons, should be adequately documented, as should include 
management’s responses to them. In addition, communication channels should exist that 
allow findings to be reported directly to the board’s Audit Committee.   
 
3.5 The Risk Manager 
 
The primary responsibility of understanding the risks run by a bank and ensuring that the 
risks are appropriately managed should clearly be vested with the board of directors. The 
board should set limits by assessing the bank’s risk and risk-bearing capacity. At the 
organizational level, overall risk management should be assigned to an independent Risk 
Manager that preferably reports directly to the board risk management committee. The Risk 
Manager must be sufficiently independent of the business lines in order to ensure an 
adequate separation of duties and the avoidance of conflicts of interest.   
The Risk Manager takes full responsibility for evaluating the overall risks faced by the bank 
and determining the level of risks that shall be in the best interest of the bank. The functions 
of the Risk Manager should essentially be to identify, measure, monitor and control the risks 
undertaken by the bank. The risk management function provides independent oversight of 
the management of risks inherent in banks. The risk manager should be a member of the 
management team (but not part of internal audit). He/she should not detract line managers 
from the primary responsibilities of managing risk in their respective business units.  
 
In general, the risk manager shall ensure that effective processes are in place for: 
          
              
 
 
 
Bank Supervision Directorate 
 
May 2010 
40
 
• identifying current and emerging risks; 
• developing risk assessment and measurement systems; 
• establishing policies, practices and other control mechanisms to manage risks; 
• developing risk tolerance limits for senior management and board approval; 
• monitoring positions against approved risk tolerance limits; and 
• reporting results of risk monitoring to senior management and board. 
 
. In broad terms, the risk manager shall: 
 
• ensure that all risks assumed by the bank (old or emerging) are identified, measured 
(where possible), transferred (e.g. by insurance), avoided, and/or controlled/mitigated 
(e.g. by a limit structure). These risks include business risks, such as credit, which are an 
inherent part of banking, and non-business risks (e.g. operational risk) which is incidental 
to business in banks; 
• ensure that responsibility for day-to-day risk management is handled by a relevant 
manager (e.g. the credit manager), whose remit is clear and comprehensive; the risk 
manager will assign responsibility (liaising as appropriate with the chief executive officer) 
for any risks that are not being covered by the existing organizational structure; 
• identify any risks which transcend organizational boundaries and ensure effective liaison 
and coordination is in place. Business resumption plans are an example of this; 
• identify and put in place measures for dealing with risks in one area which shalll have an 
impact on other parts of the bank. For example, term lending by credit and marketing in 
a bank funded by short-term deposits will have interest rate and liquidity management 
impacts on the treasury function; 
• ensure that all new business initiatives area subject to comprehensive risk assessment 
before roll out; 
• provide technical support to and be member of key risk committees, such as ALCO. 
He/she shall also attend meetings of the credit committee and any other committee that 
there may be; 
• collate the aggregate risk position of the bank from various line functions and focus on 
high risk areas for corrective action by responsible risk owners; and  
• report to the risk management committee of the board.  
 
There must be no combination with internal audit, which has to remain separate with its 
own reporting line to the audit committee of the board. 
 
3.6 Contingency Planning  
 
Notwithstanding all the efforts that may be made to identify, measure, monitor and control 
risk, it is always possible that an event or events may occur that were not contemplated at 
the time a risk management framework was developed. Contingency planning is therefore an 
essential component of effective risk management. The process starts with the assumption 
that an unexpected event can occur at any time and as banks develop their various risk 
management systems, they are expected to give due consideration to the occurrence of such 
an unexpected event. Effective contingency planning requires banks to have arrangements in 
          
              
 
 
 
Bank Supervision Directorate 
 
May 2010 
41
place that shall allow them to recover as soon as possible after the occurrence of an event 
and be in a position to resume acceptable levels of service. Achieving these objectives shall 
minimize the impact that the event shall have on the bank’s earnings, capital and reputation. 
Contingency planning is relevant to all of the risk covered in these guidelines but is most 
important in the context of the management of liquidity and operation al risk.  
 
 
 
ANNEX IV:  OFF-BALANCE SHEET RISKS 
 
4.1 Introduction 
 
As part of their operations, banks get involved in originating financial contracts that may 
result in the acquisition of assets and liabilities at some future date, under certain conditions. 
Generally accepted accounting principles do not consider these contracts in themselves to 
be assets or liabilities and therefore do not recognise them on the face of the balance sheet 
but rather off balance sheet. Off Balance sheet items are diverse in nature and purpose and 
may include letters of credit (L/C), unused loan commitments, guarantees, acceptances 
and performance bonds. The most common off balance sheet instruments are defined 
below; 
 
4.2 Letters of Credit (L/Cs) 
 
An L/C is defined broadly as a letter addressed by a bank on behalf of a buyer of 
merchandise to a seller, authorising him/her to draw drafts up to a stipulated amount under 
specified terms and undertaking conditionally or unconditionally to provide payments for 
drafts drawn. 
 
Letters of credit are the most widely used instrument to finance foreign exchange 
transactions. The risk common in L/C activity stems from breach of contract terms or 
obligations by the concerned parties and can take the form of operational risk. The common 
types of letters of credit are the commercial documentary LC and the standby LC. 
 
4.2.1 Commercial documentary Letter of Credit 
 
This is commonly used to finance a commercial contract for the shipment of goods from 
seller to buyer. A commercial documentary LC is a letter addressed by a bank (issuing bank) 
on behalf of its customer, a buyer of merchandise, to a seller (beneficiary) authorising the 
seller to draw drafts up to a stipulated amount under specific terms and undertaking to 
provide eventual payment for drafts drawn. Commercial L/Cs are issued in either 
irrevocable or revocable form. An irrevocable LC cannot be changed without the agreement 
of all parties. A revocable LC on the other hand, can be cancelled or amended by the issuing 
bank anytime without notice or agreement of the beneficiary. 
 
4.2.2 Standby Letter of credit   
 
A standby LC guarantees payment to the beneficiary by the issuing bank in the event of 
default or non-performance by the buyer (bank’s customer). A standby LC could also cover 
          
              
 
 
 
Bank Supervision Directorate 
 
May 2010 
42
performance of a construction contract, serve as an assurance to a bank that the seller shall 
honour his obligations. A standby LC typically is unsecured and is payable against a simple 
statement of default or non-performance. 
 
4.3 Guarantees, Acceptances and Performance Bonds 
 
An undertaking by a bank (the guarantor) to stand behind the current obligations of a third 
party and to carry out these obligations should the third party fail to do so guarantees, 
acceptances and performance bonds are regarded as direct credit substitutes with credit risk 
equivalent to that of a loan.  
 
4.4 Undrawn Loan/Overdraft Facilities 
 
An unconditional commitment to lend when the borrower makes a request under the 
facility. This category includes commitments for which the bank has already charged a 
commitment fee or other consideration or otherwise has a legally binding commitment. 
Unused credit facilities involve credit and liquidity risks unless there is evidence to show that 
the unused commitment shall never be drawn. However, the bank retains absolute discretion 
to withdraw the commitment in case of credit deterioration. 
  
4.5 Inherent Risks in Off-Balance Sheet Business 
 
Off-Balance sheet business to banks means exposure to several risks. The bank must have 
basic understanding of the risks associated with off-balance sheet business which, in 
principle, are not different from on-balance sheet business and should in fact be regarded as 
an integral part of the bank's overall risk profile. The major risks associated with off balance 
sheet business are summarized below: 
 
4.5.1 
Foreign Exchange Risk   
 
Off balance sheet activities can either reduce or increase exposure to exchange rate changes. 
In managing foreign exchange risk, banks must constantly monitor their foreign exchange 
positions whether arising from off or on balance sheet business. 
 
4.5.2 Interest Rate Risk   
 
Off balance sheet activities have an impact on interest rate risk exposure entered into as a 
hedge against on balance sheet interest rate exposure. Furthermore, some individual 
transactions may be undertaken to increase net interest rate exposures. In such cases, this 
may lead to an increase in interest rate as well as credit risk. Interest rate risk measurement 
and control calls for banks to perform sensitivity analyses so that management can estimate 
the effect of a given change in interest rates. 
 
4.5.3 Liquidity Risk    
 
Risk that a bank shall not be able to obtain the necessary funds to meet its obligations as 
they fall due e.g., maturing deposits, drawings under approved facilities. The bank may 
therefore be unable to obtain funds from the market at competitive rates which may convey 
          
              
 
 
 
Bank Supervision Directorate 
 
May 2010 
43
wrong signals that the bank is facing serious problems. 
 
4.5.4 Credit risk   
 
Risk that one or more counterparties might fail to perform on- of off-balance sheet 
obligation e.g., guarantees, non-cash covered L/Cs. 
4.5.5 Operational risk 
Risk that inadequate information systems or operational controls e.g., accounting, funds 
transfer and financial controls shall lead to breaches, fraud or unforeseen catastrophe that 
shall negatively affect the bank. 
 
4.6 Risk Management for Off-Balance Sheet Business 
 
Banks run the risk of losses arising from failure to apply adequate control mechanisms 
regarding off balance sheet items. The main objective is to ensure that bank's management is 
controlling the above risks through: 
 
4.6.1 
Correct policies and procedures 
 
Banks should have formal written policies on proper internal controls e.g., stating goals and 
strategies, setting limits at various levels, dual control, segregation of duties, separation of 
function and sanctioning of exposure limits as well as audit, risk control and MIS. Because 
credit exposures vary in line with foreign exchange and interest rate movements, it is 
necessary to regularly revalue the exposures. 
 
4.6.2 Well defined limits 
 
Banks should set working limits e.g., exposure limits, approval limits and should ensure that 
they are being followed. Compliance to statutory and regulatory requirements of the 
National Bank of Ethiopia should be monitored as well. 
 
4.6.3 Adequate MIS 
 
Banks should have proper information and accounting systems to enable checking and 
reconciliation procedures to be carried out on a routine basis for early detection of potential 
loss. 
 
 
ANNEX V: FUNCTIONAL RISK MATRIX 
 
5.1 Introduction 
 
A bank's business activities present various combination and concentrations of credit, 
liquidity, interest rate, foreign exchange and operational risks depending on the nature and 
scope of the particular activity.  The preparation of a Functional Risk Matrix helps identify 
the complex interdependencies of financial risks.  A sample Functional Risk Matrix is 
presented at the end of this section. 
 
          
              
 
 
 
Bank Supervision Directorate 
 
May 2010 
44
5.2 Functional Areas 
 
The most common functional areas in a banks business are: 
 
• 
Lending Operations 
• 
Treasury Activities (asset/liability management) 
• 
Investment Operations 
• 
Retail Banking Activities  
• 
Payments Systems 
• 
Management Information Systems 
 
The above functional areas are derived from key business activities. However, these areas 
may further be broken down into major product lines of banks. Banks need to draw-up a list 
of their own functional areas depending on the structure of their balance sheets, off-balance 
sheet items and major income sources. In addition, management’s strategic plans, new 
products and other new or expanding business activities have to be considered. 
 
5.3 Type and Level of Inherent Risk in Functional Areas 
 
After the functional areas and preferably, the product lines therein, are identified, the type 
and level of risk inherent in those activities and products should be described.  Banks should 
ensure that all relevant types of risk in each functional area are appropriately captured.  For 
example, lending operations shall normally expose a bank to credit risk and to such other 
risks as liquidity and interest rate. 
 
 
 
 
Functional Risk Matrix 
 
The table below is an example of Functional Risk Matrix: 
 
 
                              I N H E R E N T   R I S K S 
 
Functional 
Area/Product 
Lines 
Credit 
Liquidity
Interest 
Rate 
Foreign 
Exchang
e 
Operation
al 
Other
s 
1 Lending Operations 
• Commercial loans 
• Mortgage loans 
• Agricultural loans 
• Consumer loans 
 
  √ 
  √ 
  √ 
  √ 
 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
 
  √ 
  √ 
  √ 
  √ 
 
 
 
 
 
  √ 
  √ 
  √ 
  √ 
 
2 Treasury Activities 
 
 √ 
  √ 
 
  √ 
 
3 Investment Operations 
√ 
 
  √ 
 
   √ 
 
4 Retail Banking 
 
  √ 
  √ 
 
  √ 
 
5 Payments Systems 
√ 
    √ 
 
 
  √ 
 
          
              
 
 
 
Bank Supervision Directorate 
 
May 2010 
45
6  MIS 
 
 
 
 
  √ 
 
7 Other Areas 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8  Other Products 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MAIN REFERENCES 
 
1 
Basel Committee on Banking Supervision 
 
- 
Principles for the Management of Credit Risk (September 2000) 
- 
Sound Practices for Managing Liquidity in Banking Organizations 
      (February 2000) 
- 
Principles for the Management and Supervision of Interest Rate Risk (January 
2001) 
- 
Sound Practices for the Management and Supervision of Operational Risk 
(December 2001) 
 
2 
World Bank’s Bank Supervision Guidelines 
 
- 
Foreign Exchange Management 
- 
Credit Portfolio Evaluation 
 
3 
Canadian Deposit Insurance Corporation (CDIC) Standards of Sound Business and 
Financial Practices 
 
4 
Office of the Comptroller’s Handbook (USA) 
 
5 
Federal Reserve System’s Commercial Bank Examination Manual 
 
6 
Australian Prudential Regulatory Authority 
 
- 
Risk Management Systems in Banks 
 
7 
Guidelines Reserve Bank of India Risk Management Systems in Banks (October 
1999) 
8. 
Hennie Van Greuning.Sonja Brajovic Bratanovic Analyzing Banking Risk 
(November 1999)  
