 
 
 
 
The Case for Global Public Investment: 
Redesigning Development Assistance in 
Ethiopia 
 
Technical Note 
 
By: Ethiopian Economics Association (EEA) 
 
Technical Team 
Semeneh Bessie 
Adem Feto 
Mengistu Ketema 
 
 
March 2024 
 
 
ii 
 
Contents 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS .................................................................................................................... iii 
ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS .............................................................................................. iv 
1. 
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................................................ 1 
2. 
APPROACHES OF THE STUDY ................................................................................................. 4 
3. 
FOREIGN DEVELOPMENT AID: HISTORY, IMPORTANCE, AND CHALLENGES .... 4 
3.1. 
Trends and Experiences of Development Aid in Africa 
................................................. 4 
3.2. 
Challenges of Aid-Based Development Assistance in Africa ........................................ 6 
3.3. 
Challenges of Development Aid in Ethiopia ..................................................................... 7 
4. 
CONCEPTUALIZING GLOBAL PUBLIC INVESTMENT 
..................................................... 8 
4.1. Basics of GPI .................................................................................................................................. 8 
4.2. The Thinking behind the GPI Principles ............................................................................... 10 
4.3. Contextualizing GPI in Ethiopia 
.............................................................................................. 11 
5. 
GPI: BENEFITS AND REQUIRED PREPAREDNESS ........................................................... 13 
5.1. 
The Role of GPI to Finance the SDGs 
.............................................................................. 13 
5.2. 
Why is GPI Important for Africa? ..................................................................................... 14 
5.3. 
Why is GPI Necessary for Ethiopia? ................................................................................. 15 
5.4. 
Preparedness in Implementing GPI 
.................................................................................. 16 
6. 
CONCLUSION AND RECOMMENDATIONS/IMPLICATIONS 
....................................... 17 
6.1. Conclusion .................................................................................................................................... 17 
6.2. Recommendations/Implications .............................................................................................. 18 
REFERENCES 
.......................................................................................................................................... 19 
 
 
 
 
iii 
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
This resource was produced by the Ethiopian Economics Association (EEA) with support from 
Development Initiatives (DI).  
  
 
 
 
The EEA assigned a team of experts for developing the document, organized a validation and 
dissemination workshop (in collaboration with DI), and supported incorporation of feedback 
from participants, reviewers, and editors. Ideas expressed in this publication are those of the 
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the EEA. 
DI supported the production of this report, including facilitating peer review and providing 
editorial assistance and guidance. The opinions expressed are those of the author and do not 
necessarily reflect the views of DI. 
EEA is a non-profit, non-partisan and non-religious professional association established in 1991 
with a mission of promoting professional interests of its members, advancing the discipline of 
economics, and contributing to the economic development of Ethiopia and beyond. 
DI unlocks the power of data to enable policies and investments that improve the lives of people 
experiencing poverty, inequality and crisis. Read more about DI’s work on Global Public 
Investment.  
This report is copyright 2024 Ethiopian Economics Association and licensed under a Creative 
Commons Attribution BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license, unless stated otherwise. We 
encourage dissemination of the work provided a reference is included. 
Ethiopian Economics Association would like to thank the Development Initiatives (DI) for its 
partnership in supporting the production, review, and dissemination of this publication. 
 
 
 
iv 
 
ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS 
AfDB   
 
African Development Bank 
COVID-19  
 
Coronavirus disease – 2019 
CRGE     
 
Climate Resilient Green Economy 
DI  
 
 
Development Initiatives 
EEA   
 
Ethiopian Economics Association 
EWG-GPI                  Expert Working Group on Global Public Investment  
GDP   
 
Gross domestic product 
GPGs   
 
global public goods 
GPI  
 
 
Global Public Investment  
IDP  
 
 
internally displaced persons 
IMF      
 
 
International Monetary Fund                           
IPCC    
 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change 
LDCs    
 
Least developed countries 
ODA   
 
official development assistance 
SDGs   
 
Sustainable Development Goals 
 
SSA      
 
 
sub-Saharan Africa  
UN  
 
 
United Nations 
UNDP     
 
United Nations Development Programme   
UNFCCC  
 
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change 
WB  
 
 
World Bank 
 
 
1 
 
1. INTRODUCTION 
In the 21st century, globalization and the advancement of research and technology have simplified 
communications and the lives of people around the globe. At the same time, and sometimes 
because of this, people in the world are facing multiple challenges due to transboundary problems 
like the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, climate change, and conflict; commonly 
referred to as “The Global Triple C” challenge. Furthermore, the failure to secure a more 
equitable and effective allocation of resources to achieve the global common agenda demands 
global cooperation and solidarity. 
Many countries have been independently allocating huge resources to tackle these global 
manmade and natural catastrophes. However, one country cannot single-handedly tackle these 
challenges and hence global cooperation is required. On the other hand, nations also rely on 
developmental and humanitarian aid and assistance to combat the effects of global emergencies, 
yet funding of this nature has failed to bring reliable and long-lasting solutions. 
Despite the attention given by world leaders to combatting these global problems, the challenges 
remain. For instance, the impact of climate change has become one of the most serious threats 
to the global economy. It seems it will continue to be the largest threat in the future worldwide, 
substantially affecting developing countries. Climate change has been disrupting the global 
economy, triggering food insecurity, and exacerbating poverty in Africa. The World Economic 
Forum (2021) estimated that global warming due to climate change will reduce 18% of world 
gross domestic product (GDP) if no proper action was taken by 2022. According to the 5th 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) assessment report, Africa is particularly 
vulnerable to climate change.  
To tackle climate change and its negative impacts, world leaders held a conference (COP15) in 
Copenhagen in 2009 and they collectively agreed to allocate huge resources in the form of aid. 
However, the conventional aid-based financing system has failed to address the challenges of 
climate change and other transboundary global contests. Moreover, recurrent drought triggered 
by climate change has become a major challenge in countries like Ethiopia. This requires world 
leaders, policymakers and financiers to think of a new, inclusive and dynamic means of 
2 
 
international development finance that takes into account a globally ambitious, long-term and 
reliable investment in global public goods (GPGs). 
In a similar vein, the recent COVID-19 pandemic triggered a global economic crisis. The 2022 
World Bank report showed that the COVID-19 crisis had a dramatic impact on global poverty 
and aggravated inequality across countries. The report revealed that global poverty has increased 
for the first time in a generation, and disproportionate income losses among disadvantaged 
populations has led to a dramatic rise in inequality within and across countries due to the 
pandemic. The economic impacts of the pandemic were especially severe in Africa where income 
losses caused by the pandemic worsened some preexisting economic fragilities. For example, the 
pandemic led to an increase in public expenditure, public deficit, external debt and the debt 
service ratio in Ethiopia (Geda, 2021). 
Since the pandemic severally damaged less prepared low-income countries, scholars have debated 
the conventional aid-based development financing system that centers on “give and take” 
narratives. Nchofoung et al (2022) criticized the current aid architecture, positing a popular 
quote: “Teach me to fish instead of giving me fish”. The current public finance model is wrong 
and relies on donors’ interest. The quote tells us about the need for a concrete, inclusive, longer-
term and more reliable public finance system that enhances collective decision and investment in 
the GPGs, capital and infrastructure they require.  
Conflict also has cross boundary social, economic and political effects. A case in point is the 
Russia-Ukraine war. The war has been crippling not only the two countries’ economies but has 
also had a devastating effect on the global economy, impacting the prices of fuel, food and 
fertilizer. 
In terms of approach, the existing development financing model is not only skewed in the interests 
of developed nations but also applies top-down decision-making that cannot fit to the 21st 
century development and financing requirements. The World Bank (WB) has also criticized aid-
based development as it failed to ensure ownership, and hence resulted in fragmentation and 
weak impact at the sector level in Africa (World Bank, 2000). 
According to Clark, former New Zealand Prime Minister and former UNDP Administrator, “aid” 
is outdated and ineffective and we require transformation in current international cooperation 
3 
 
to finance global goods. On top of that, scholars argue that aid made recipient countries 
dependent. The aid approach has not provided a solution, has not taken people out of poverty, 
and has not brought about long-lasting and sustainable development. The bottom-line with aid is 
that it is not jointly owned by the recipients and donors, not mutually decided, and not considered 
as an investment by developing countries. The motivation of this paper is to discuss new 
modalities that transform the thinking, ownership, decision, and evaluations. 
To address these daunting challenges and escape out of the problems, a new funding model is 
crucial. In order to mobilize the necessary finance, collective actions and strengthening solidarity 
of global leaders and policymakers is also fundamental. Hence, policymakers, development 
partners and funding organizations should devise an innovative, inclusive and suitable new funding 
model. This new model could be a Global Public Investment (GPI) modality. To this effect, the 
Ethiopian Economics Association (EEA), in collaboration with Development Initiatives (DI), has 
taken the responsibility to institutionalize and localize the concept and practices of GPI at 
institutional and national level. 
This technical note is prepared with the general intention to create awareness, improve 
ownership and socialize the concept of GPI and its application in Ethiopia. It is prepared to address 
the following specific objectives: 
1. Describing the trends of development aid in Africa and Ethiopia; 
2. Reviewing, documenting, and analyzing the existing conceptual, theoretical and empirical 
evidence on GPI; and 
3. Identifying the main challenges and opportunities of aid in Africa and Ethiopia. 
 
 
4 
 
2. APPROACHES OF THE STUDY  
The study reviewed the available conceptual, empirical and theoretical literature focusing on the 
quest for development assistance and the case for shifting to GPI. It presents  the basics, 
principles, and approaches of GPI; benefits of GPI; and other related issues. In addition, available 
secondary data were utilized to indicate the extent and trends of development assistance in Africa 
and Ethiopia. 
The findings could provide an opportunity for a discussion among the public sector, private 
sector, non-state actors, academia, donors, and mainstream and social media that would 
potentially enhance visibility, socialization and uptake of GPI in Ethiopia. 
3. FOREIGN DEVELOPMENT AID: HISTORY, IMPORTANCE, AND 
CHALLENGES 
3.1. 
Trends and Experiences of Development Aid in Africa 
In the last six decades, total global aid has grown more than four-fold, from US$38 billion in 1960 
to US$185.9 billion in 2021. Similarly, aid to African countries amounted to US$60.5 billion in 
2021, or 33.6% of total global aid. In 2021, 20.7% of global aid went to low-income countries, 
27.0% to lower-middle income countries, 11.7% to upper-middle income countries, and 0.1% to 
high-income countries (World Bank, 2023). 
In terms of sectors, the health sector received the largest proportion, 18.3% of aid (US$34.9 
billion). In 2021, 13.9% of aid was humanitarian (US$26.5 billion). From 2020 to 2021, total aid 
increased by 8.5% in real terms. Some of this increase was due to spending related to COVID-
19 (including vaccines). Excluding COVID-19, it increased by just 5.2%.  The United States alone 
provided US$2 billion in humanitarian assistance to the people of Africa in response to the 
catastrophic drought and flooding that continued to affect countries across the continent. The 
trend in general shows that aid to African counties continues to increase over time. 
There are four lines of research on the impact of foreign aid on economic growth. One view is 
that foreign capital inflows are both necessary and sufficient for economic growth in developing 
5 
 
countries. The second collection of studies contends that external capital has a major detrimental 
impact on recipient countries' economic growth. The third point of view holds that foreign aid 
has no effect on economic growth. The fourth point of view is that the quality of the recipient 
country's institutions and economic policies, that is, integrated monetary, fiscal, and trade policies, 
may influence the relationship between foreign aid and economic growth. 
Figure 1 presents the net official development assistance (ODA) and official aid received by 
Ethiopia and sub-Saharan African (SSA) countries, GDP growth rate of Ethiopia and the Ethiopian 
share of aid compared to SSA. In the time period between 1982 to 2021, aid to Ethiopia increased 
from US$0.2 billion to US$4.0 billion, and from US$7.9 billion to US$62.3 billion for SSA 
countries. Ethiopia’s share compared to SSA is 6.4%. Ethiopia’s share remained stagnant against 
the GDP growth rate of the country. Furthermore, Figure 1 shows that aid and economic growth 
have no relationship. Other factors, other than aid, could be more important in determining the 
economic growth of the country.  
Figure 1: Net ODA and Official Aid Received, Share of Ethiopia from SSA, GDP Growth 
-15
-10
-5
0
5
10
15
20
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
1982
1983
1984
1985
1986
1987
1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
in %
in billions
Year
Net ODA and official aid received (Ethiopia, billion)
Net ODA and official aid received, (SSA, billion)
GDP growth, (Ethiopia, %)
Share of Ethiopia from SSA (%)
 
Source: Authors own computation Based on World Bank’s World Development Indicators 
(2023) 
6 
 
3.2. 
Challenges of Aid-Based Development Assistance in Africa 
There are two broad ongoing academic debates regarding the effect of development aid in Africa: 
the positive and negative impacts of aid. Large bodies of academic literature have devoted 
reporting on the advantages of aid in Africa in general, and in Ethiopia in particular. Fungibility1, 
corruption and rent seeking, and lack of absorption capacity and donor conditionalities are some 
of the unintended effects of development aid in Africa (Jensen, 2010).  
According to Dambisa Moyo (2009), money in the form of aid from rich countries has harmed 
Africa, trapping many African nations in a cycle of corruption, slower economic growth and 
poverty. She pointed out that over US$1 trillion have been pumped into the African continent in 
the last 50 years. Africa has not enjoyed welfare improvement from aid (Pearse, 2021). The 
World Bank report showed that aid to sub-Saharan African countries has been less effective in 
promoting economic growth and development (World Bank, 1991). The report shows that over 
75% of the global population living in poverty were in Africa in 2022. Moyo strongly argued that 
the benefit from development aid is zero. According to her view, African people are much worse 
off, and aid helped make the poor poorer, and growth slower. Using empirical evidence, she also 
argued that the aid approach is not working in Africa and needs to change. Some of the main 
problems with development aid are that it makes countries dependent, promotes favoritism, fails 
to meet recipient countries’ development priorities, corrupts officials, and that it increased the 
continent’s indebtedness resulting in aid “tying” in Africa (Kwakye, 2010).  Many countries in 
Africa have failed to record any positive connection between aid and economic growth and 
development.  
Indeed, some argued that sadly, the region has fallen behind the rest of the developing world after 
receiving development aid from western countries for many years (Tigist, 2021). Aprioku (2019), 
in his empirical analysis, showed that aid is ineffective in addressing the problem of poverty and 
unemployment in Africa. Alghamdi (2016) explained that reliance on foreign aid creates moral 
hazards for recipient countries’ around accountability, transparency and ethical leadership with 
aid in Africa (Maipose, 2000). Recently, China has tended to join and support this view, and the 
 
1 Diversion of resources away from development and social projects. 
7 
 
current ‘aid’ landscape, has been quickly changing in China from a paradigm of development 
assistance to development cooperation (Buckley, 2013).   
Opponents of development aid therefore call on African countries to explore alternative means 
of mobilizing resources to finance development challenges. From the African perspective, the 
current aid approach needs some financial engineering to meet the development priorities of 
African countries and mitigate the impacts of global challenges. 
3.3. 
Challenges of Development Aid in Ethiopia 
Ethiopia’s economic growth and development largely depends on foreign aid received from 
Western countries and multinational corporations. Evidence shows that 90% of African budgets 
relied on aid. In 2019, Ethiopia received 50% of its national fiscal budget in the form of aid 
(Ethiopian Business Review, 2023). However, this amount has declined to 14% in 2023 due to the 
impact of conflict in the Northern part of the country. From this, a larger proportion of 
development aid is given to Ethiopia by the US, UK and multinational institutions (WB, IMF and 
UN). Western countries continued to assist least developed countries to implement the 
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) and spur economic growth. Still, LDC economies heavily 
rely on foreign aid. Since 2020 alone, the United States has provided an estimated US$3.2 billion 
in humanitarian assistance in response to the conflict as well as an ongoing drought. 
Empirical findings show a negative impact of foreign aid in Ethiopia on economic growth in both 
the long and short term (Gebresilassie et al., 2023). In particular, the aid-based financing system 
has become less effective in fighting transboundary global common good challenges. 
Consequently, and despite expectations, foreign aid has failed to bring sustainable economic 
growth and poverty reduction. For instance, Tigist (2021) suggested alternative sources of 
financing such as private sector development and entrepreneurship development in Ethiopia. In a 
nutshell, despite significant assistance received from different countries, poverty, disease, 
illiteracy, the gender gap, poor governance, and climate change have remained challenges for the 
country.  
8 
 
4. CONCEPTUALIZING GLOBAL PUBLIC INVESTMENT  
4.1. Basics of GPI 
GPI is a simple concept but one with great potential. It is a new funding approach that aims to 
diversify international public funds, diversify decision-making around funding and create mutual 
trust and responsibility to mobilize and allocate international public finance (Njenga and Mwangi, 
2022). It is a new paradigm that can address current and future public good challenges. Baptiste 
and Glennie (2022) pointed out that an understanding of GPI among governments and 
development partners is critical to it playing a role in tackling the challenges facing GPGs and 
realizing the SDGs. In contrast to ODA or official aid, the concept of GPI recognizes that 
concessional international public finance should have an ongoing role in responding to current 
and future global challenges in all countries.  
GPI is different from “global taxes” (no state is currently willing to abandon fiscal sovereignty), 
“innovative” forms of public finance cooperation (such as advanced market commitments and 
public−private partnerships), and existing forms of concessionary international finance (such as 
development “aid”) of which around 70% is bilateral in nature (Simon Reid-Henry, 2019). Instead, 
it is a system in which nations commit resources voluntarily to enhance the global commons and 
finance on domestic public goods such as health systems, infrastructure and basic services 
provision. GPI has three principles: all contribute according to their means, all benefit according 
to their needs, and all decide. For this to happen, it requires all countries to work together with 
no more top-down decision-making and no more patronizing donor−recipient narratives. 
As Yasmin and Curtain (2022) noted, GPI is a financial model where all countries pay according 
to their ability, all receive benefits based on their needs and all have a say in how the money is 
spent via a constituency-based model. The GPI model has been initiated and developed because 
of its unique characteristics of fairness in tackling inequality and addressing sustainability to have 
a critical role in responding to current and future global challenges. Despite its significant 
contribution, little is known on the concept of GPI in Africa in general and in Ethiopia in particular. 
Figure 2 shows GPI’s principal components and evaluations towards international cooperation. 
The left-hand column of Figure 2 indicates the concept of GPI is being developed to make the 
9 
 
case that international public finance has a critical role to play in tackling the climate emergency, 
preparing for the next pandemic, and financing the SDGs. We need a concrete system of meeting 
our global ambitions through long-term, reliable investment in the goods, capital and 
infrastructure they require. The middle column of Figure 2 comprises three universal principles 
(ALL-contribute-decide-benefit), reflecting a more horizontal approach to addressing the world’s 
challenges. It is time for all countries to work together to mark a transformation in international 
cooperation. 
Figure 2: The GPI Principles and Evolutionary Steps in International Public Financing towards 
International Cooperation 
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Source: 
Figure 
created 
using 
Global 
Public 
Investment 
Network 
icons: 
https://globalpublicinvestment.net/what-is-gpi/  
Global Long-Term; 
Reliable Goods, 
Capital And 
Infrastructure 
Investment 
Universal 
Principles 
Major 
Evolutions  
Global Public Investment 
10 
 
The right-hand column of Figure 2 shows that five major evolutions are needed for GPI to work 
(i.e., ambition; function; geography; governance and narrative) and to underpin the next 50 years 
of development cooperation. The push for ambition is move us from a narrow focus on reducing 
poverty to meeting broader challenges of inequality and sustainability. The function evolution 
refers to shifting away from seeing international public money as a temporary last resort to valuing 
it as a permanent force for good. The geography aspect is a shift away from one directional 
North−South transfers to a universal effort, with all paying in and all benefiting. The governance 
evolution would take us from outdated post-colonial institutions to representative decision-
making. Finally, the narrative evolution advances a shift from the patronizing language of “foreign 
aid”, to the empowering multilateralism of a common fiscal endeavor. 
4.2. The Thinking behind the GPI Principles 
The principles of GPI could be applied to create a more effective, equitable and sustainable system 
of global public financing and coordination for pandemic preparedness. The following 10 points 
explain the thinking behind GPI: 
1. Cocreating of GPI: According to the Expert Working Group on GPI, cocreation is at the 
heart of the approach, from defining the problem that it seeks to address and the principles 
that it sets out as a solution (McCoy, 2022). 
2. Equality and sustainability: GPI is necessary for global equality and sustainability. 
3. Ambition and thinking outside of the box: GPI is an ambitious, out-of-the-box and 
transformative approach to some of the most pressing problems that international society 
confronts: from the COVID-19 pandemic to climate change.  
4. Democracy, inclusivity and multilateralism: All countries commit to spending a fixed 
proportion of gross national income annually. A new system where every country in the 
world has a stake, a voice, and mutual accountability and structure has become critical. There 
has to be a mutual system of naming and shaming and penalization for countries which have 
failed to comply with the GPI principles and values. 
5. More money: GPI can raise radically fresh money for global priorities. 
6. Collective action: All countries contribute according to ability, and all countries receive 
according to need. 
11 
 
7. Revise the paradigm: Dismantle the donor−recipient concept (a hangover from the colonial 
financing system), and enable all countries to contribute and be involved in decision-making. 
8. Universal contributions: GPI moves beyond the broken promises and patronizing language 
of the current international order, where “donor” countries give to “recipient” countries. 
In its place, it introduces an all-contributor approach to international public finance. 
9. Ongoing commitments: GPI ends the flawed insistence that countries “graduate” after 
achieving a relatively low level of income per capita. We need to dramatically expand our 
timescales and begin thinking longer-term. 
10. Representative control: GPI is a more democratic and accountable approach to the way 
international public finance is governed. 
4.3. Contextualizing GPI in Ethiopia 
The relevance of GPI to Ethiopia could be mainly around the impact of climate change and the 
country’s development strategy.  
GPGs such as global health, the global environment, global peace and security, and global 
infrastructure, benefit both developed and developing countries. However, these GPGs are 
threatened by climate change, infectious diseases, financial crises, conflict, inequality, social 
protection and aid decolonization that can harm developing countries disproportionately. 
Exploiting opportunities, such as the creation of new vaccines, can also benefit developing 
countries less than developed ones (Nancy and Diofasi, 2015).  
Due to the catastrophic impacts of climate change, world leaders and the international community 
have agreed to respond to the problem of climate change by adopting the United Nations 
Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) − signed by 154 states − informally 
known as the Earth Summit, held in Rio de Janeiro in 1992. In 1997, world leaders agreed to the 
Kyoto Protocol to stabilize the concentration of greenhouse gases, and the continuation of it was 
agreed in the Copenhagen Accord of 2009, which is accepted as a political declaration. The Paris 
Agreement  held in 2015 at COP21 was an international treaty by 196 parties on climate change 
that covers climate change mitigation, adaptation, and finance. 
12 
 
According to the African Economic Outlook report (2022), Ethiopia has remained vulnerable to 
climate change resulting in droughts, flooding, desertification, water scarcity, and increased 
incidence of pests affecting the agriculture, energy, and health sectors. The 2016 El Niño-induced 
drought affected about 10.2 million people, required a US$1.9 billion humanitarian response. The 
Productive Safety Net Programme, adopted in 2005 to reduce vulnerability to climate shocks, 
covers 8 million–10 million people at an annual cost of US$0.44 billion.  
Despite its negligible contribution to global warming, Ethiopia is currently facing serious 
challenges arising from climate change. It is expected to have severe negative impacts on the 
livelihoods of smallholder farmers, as the country’s economy heavily depends on rain fed 
agriculture. Climate change affects socio-economic systems such as human health, the 
environment, agriculture, water supply, sanitation and socio-economic activities in the country. 
According to the 2022 AfDB report, Ethiopia’s economy decelerated to 5.6% growth in 2021 
from 6.1% in 2020, due to international and transboundary crises (civil conflict and the effects of 
COVID-19). In the Borena zone of Ethiopia, around 372,000 people, roughly 30% of the Zonal 
population, were displaced between March–September 2022 (FEWS NET, 2022) due to the 
drought. There are over 800,000 residents in the region, and they are facing one of the deadliest 
droughts the area has seen for years.  
In order to mitigate and adapt to climate change, the National Adaptation Plan was launched 
focusing on the sectors that have been identified as most vulnerable, namely agriculture, forestry, 
health, transport, power, industry, water and urban areas. However, tackling global climate 
change is an inherently complex problem that requires robust inter-related policies at 
international, regional and local levels. The 2011 Climate Resilient Green Economy (CRGE) 
Strategy adopted by the country provides a framework for lowering greenhouse gas emissions 
and mitigating the effects of climate change.  
In 2020, an average of US$1.7 billion per year of investments were committed towards climate 
change-related activities. This is about 7% of Ethiopia’s estimated climate finance needs (US$25.3 
billion) and less than 2% of Ethiopia’s GDP in 2020.  
As part of the country’s green economy initiative, Ethiopia has planted 25 billion seedlings since 
2019. On top of that, according to the Prime Minister of Ethiopia Abiy Ahmed, Ethiopia managed 
13 
 
to plant more than 560 million trees in just a day (July 17, 2023) mobilizing 34 million Ethiopians 
to plant trees in over 300,000 hectares of land nationwide. At the COP26 summit, developing 
nations requested richer nations to finance developing countries’ efforts in mitigating the impacts 
of climate damage. However, there has been no special reward and recognition from the 
international financial institutions for the country’s positive externality to the environment. This 
implies that the conventional aid-based donor−recipient public finance model has failed to address 
and comply with the fairness principle. Hence, this paper argues that Ethiopia should look for a 
more reliable, sustainable, and concessional international public financing system known as GPI.           
5. GPI: BENEFITS AND REQUIRED PREPAREDNESS 
5.1. The Role of GPI to Finance the SDGs  
In line with the SDGs, Ethiopia has created an ambitious Ten-Year Development Plan (PDC, 
2021) and Homegrown Economic Reform Agenda (HGERA, 2019). The implementation of these 
plans would strongly rely on donors’ aid from multinational corporations. Although the WB and 
other international development partners used to finance Ethiopia's development arenas such as 
rural land certification, multinational corporations such as the IMF and WB lack appetite to 
finance Ethiopia’s current development endeavors, probably for political reasons. This could be a 
good reason to look for a more reliable, transparent and suitable source of development 
financing, rather than relying on old-fashioned, donor−recipient bilateral collaborations. 
The GPI approach is, therefore, the best bet for modernizing international public finance for the 
21st century as the current system of “aid” is outdated and ineffective. As a result, a sound, 
politically attractive and feasible approach has to be adopted to socialize and localize the ideas of 
GPI across countries. In line with this, in 2022 the Expert Working Group on GPI came together 
to address the challenges of the COVID-19 pandemic, and outlined an eight-step framework. This 
includes:  
1. creation of the idea  
2. validation 
3. defining the problem  
4. seek solutions 
5. organize dialogue 
14 
 
6. deliberation of the experts’ ideas 
7. global consultation 
8. on-going co-creation 
This framework can be adopted for the current Ethiopian reality. In light of addressing current 
transboundary challenges, Ethiopia needs to promote the GPI scheme to meet the objectives of 
the SDGs by 2030. The GPI framework can be realized in Ethiopia via organizing continuous 
discussion forums.  
5.2. Why is GPI Important for Africa? 
Africa is the world’s eighth largest economy, and it aims to become the world’s third largest by 
2063. Despite ample resources, Africa has been suffering with global social, economic and 
environmental challenges. African countries  are unable to finance their own development. 
Indeed, now it has become clearer than ever that serious structural changes are needed to 
safeguard communities in Africa and around the world. In addition, the world’s financial 
architecture to support growth and development has several structural problems. For example, 
Africa is the only region that does not have its own Monetary Fund, meaning African countries 
can only turn to the IMF as a lender of the last resort (Chacha, 2022).  
Moreover, the COVID-19 pandemic and other global health events have begun to challenge this 
limited understanding, especially when applied to key public goods issues, such as infrastructure, 
health and climate change. In general, the current system of development cooperation has failed 
to lift African countries out of poverty. Therefore, GPI would mean a better public investment 
approach that works for everyone. According to Mavis Owusu-Gyamfi, Executive Vice President 
of the African Center for Economic Transformation “The GPI approach enables Africa to become 
a key player in global cooperation rather than being perceived as a recipient of aid”. 
The world’s system of financing public goods and common challenges is not working for the 
African continent. From climate change to health vaccine inequity, African countries bear the 
impacts of a global system which it is unable to influence to respond to its own needs and 
preferences. This is despite the fact that African needs and priorities are well defined and known 
through Agenda 2063, its six frameworks and 15 flagship projects. To solve the problems facing 
Africa in a more sustainable manner, a new financing approach is required. With the COVID-19 
15 
 
crisis spurring desire for a significant transformation in how global objectives are funded, and with 
the climate crisis in full swing, it is time for African governments, businesses and citizens to insist 
on better partnerships to leverage its own significant domestic and regional efforts. Recently, 
scholars, government officials, business people, academics, think tanks and civil society 
representatives tend to agree with the benefits of GPI. 
5.3. Why is GPI Necessary for Ethiopia? 
Many global cooperation efforts do little to include developing countries in priority setting and 
decision-making. The late Prime Minister of Ethiopia, Meles Zenawi, represented African 
countries at the Copenhagen climate change talks, and demanded that the rich world compensate 
Africa. Since Copenhagen, Ethiopia has adopted the CRGE. Development financers are often 
reliant on the goodwill of advanced economies. It is clear that the current system of addressing 
global challenges and financing public goods in Ethiopia has also remained ineffective. A case in 
point is the lack of priority in financing climate change by multilateral institutions. This is despite 
the significant investment by the Ethiopian government in massive plantation. The country has 
not received the right compensation for initiating the green legacy and planting about 25 billion 
trees across the country from 2019 to 2022. To the contrary, the country has been hit by serious 
drought triggered by climate change. In effect, the country’s natural resources and livelihood 
assets have been depleted due to continued climate change. As a result, food insecurity and 
poverty have been widening in the country. Due to global shocks, a large number of livestock has 
died, and millions of people have been displaced and are in need of urgent humanitarian assistance. 
In the face of a ravaging global pandemic, and recurring drought triggered by climate change, it 
has become more critical than ever that the country should have quick, effective and coordinated 
means of financing its response via the international community. 
Ethiopia greatly contributes to controlling terrorism, it is home to many internally displaced 
persons, and it invests in the environment. And yet the world, particularly the current IMF and 
WB financing system, fails to support it in responding to shocks, or encourage the country’s 
efforts. Hence, it can be concluded that the current public financing model is not fair and no 
longer fit to respond to the existing global challenges effectively. The current context in Ethiopia 
demands the need for increased concessional funding to fight communicable diseases and enhance 
16 
 
climate adaptation and mitigation. Therefore, it is essential to have more ambitious goals and 
think outside of the box in order to engage effectively with climate finance at global, regional and 
local levels. 
5.4.  Preparedness in Implementing GPI 
With the current discourse on global financial architecture reform,  change is imminent and GPI 
provides the much-needed solution. For instance, Simon Reid-Henry (2019) highlighted 
management complexity, revenue-sharing, systems-coordination and legal compliance as major 
challenges.  
There are, however, practical challenges that may slow down the effective implementation of 
GPI. Political commitment is one of these barriers, and it needs to be consolidated into a coherent 
plan of action to make GPI a reality. GPI would demand similar but differentiated responsibilities 
from all stakeholders, rich, poor and middle-income nations alike. It needs to be clear how this 
can be done practically. 
Since GPI is a new initiative, it may take time and effort to transform from the old-fashioned aid 
approach to this new approach. The means and methods for governments, organizations and 
individuals to promote GPI need to be established. More specifically, the following barriers need 
to be properly communicated and addressed: 
• The first main barriers are around collective action, the “Free Rider” and “Weakest Link” 
problems in particular. Free-riding is the most common problem that public goods-type 
provision faces at the international level: the incentive for some not to contribute to realizing 
a particular global good because such goods are, by their nature, available to all. This makes 
it impossible to exclude non-contributors from consuming the good in question. 
• The second most commonly raised objection to the feasibility of GPI is the issue of selection. 
In other words, how do we agree on outcomes and how do we prioritize among them? 
• The third potential problem of GPI is political feasibility in implementing and administering 
formal structures of international cooperation. The more new organizations that need to be 
established and legitimized, especially at the global level, the less likely the chance of success.  
17 
 
• Finally, there is the issue of demonstrable effect: how can contributors be confident that they 
really are getting something back from what they pay into the scheme? 
6. CONCLUSION AND RECOMMENDATIONS/IMPLICATIONS 
6.1. Conclusion 
This technical note is prepared by the EEA to trigger discussion on the concept of GPI in Ethiopia. 
This note provides background on aid flows and the adverse impacts of the current aid 
architecture. The paper has argued that the current donor−recipient development financing 
system in Africa in general, and the aid-dependent development approach in Ethiopia in particular, 
has failed to address transboundary global challenges. As an alternative public finance model, some 
countries are inclined to support GPI. According to the EWG-GPI (2020), Indonesia, Mexico, 
Uruguay, Norway, Sweden, and Chile support GPI as a more reliable, inclusive, flexible and 
sustainable source of public funding. 
GPI principles can guide the mobilization of public money from all countries to invest in public 
goods and services that have global benefits to prevent or respond to environmental and health 
catastrophes, international war and conflict in our planet.  
Ethiopia has made profound investment in public goods to combat global problems, including 
climate change, infectious disease, and terrorism. As part of the green economy and SMART 
agriculture, Ethiopia has been carrying out huge tree plantation projects that could reduce the 
impact of climate change. Though the country has contributed to reducing climate change through 
massive reforestation and afforestation, the current aid-based global financial system did not 
properly recognize Ethiopia’s efforts and compensate the county for investing in such vital GPGs. 
Since GPI is a new initiative, it may take time and effort to transition from the old-fashioned aid 
approach to the new approach. However, there should be means and ways for governments, 
organizations and individuals to promote GPI. 
The analysis argues that the more flexible approach of GPI should be promoted and adopted in 
Ethiopia, replacing historical donor−recipient relationships. Such an approach would require much 
18 
 
stronger international cooperation, which would ultimately lead to a better distribution of 
resources and sustainable development in the post COVID-19 world. 
6.2. Recommendations/Implications 
Based on the findings from the desk review, GPI is a compelling concept that can fit to the current 
socioeconomic and political context of Ethiopia. It is a feasible means of addressing the problem 
of “the end of old-fashioned aid scheme”. More specifically:  
• It provides an alternative that can bring about an end to the language of ‘donors’ and 
‘recipients’, of ‘aid’ and ‘charity’. It provides an opportunity to start talking about public 
investment for the common good.  
• Ensure that the governance in international organizations reflects a shift towards inclusive 
decision-making, so that net-recipients of funds are equally involved as net-contributors in 
governance. 
• Shift the focus of international organizations towards the broad SDG mandate e.g., in Ethiopia, 
covering inequality, sustainability and all the areas in which international public money can be 
useful. 
 
 
 
19 
 
REFERENCES 
Alemayehu Geda (2021). The Macroeconomic and Social Impact of COVID-19 in Ethiopia in 
the Global context.  
Alicia Ely Yamin and Joel Curtain (2022). Lessons from the pandemic: Building a movement 
for global public investment.  
Ethiopian Business Review (2022). Foreign Aid: Holds Itself Back. 
Expert Working Group on Global Public Investment (2022). Building A better system: Making 
Global public Investment a reality. 
George Njenga and Brian Mwangi (2022). Global Public Investment: A New Approach to 
Overseas Development Aid. 
GPI-Network (2022). Global Public Investment and Africa: A better approach to financing the 
SDGs. 
Homegrown Economic Reform Agenda, 2019. 
Jonathan Glennie (2022). Global Public Investment: how a radical vision became reality 
Magazine IDEES No. 55 
Kempe Ronald Hope Sr. (2000). Corruption and Development in Africa. Palgrave Macmillan. 
Nancy Birdsall and Anna Diofasi. 2015. Global Public Goods for Development: How Much 
and What For  
PDC (Planning and Development Commission) (2021). Ten-year Development Plan, Addis 
Ababa Ethiopia.  
Samuel Wangwe (2006). Foreign Aid in Africa: Role, Experiences and Challenges. Background 
Paper for the AfDB Conference in Tunis. 
Simon Reid-Henry (2019). Global Public Investment: Redesigning International Public Finance 
for Social Cohesion—A Preliminary Sketch. Revue d'économie du développement 
2019/2 (Vol. 27), pages 169−201. 
Solange Baptiste and Jonathan Galenn (2022). Rethinking Humanitarianism | Can Global Public 
Investment replace aid financing as we know it? The New Humanitarian. 
The European Parliament resolution of 25 November (2009) on the EU strategy for Climate 
Change (COP 15) (Provisional version). 
20 
 
Tii N. Nchofoung, Arsène A. Njamen Kengdo, Eric Mouchili Moumie, Tii Tasheh Fonsoh 
(2022). Teach me to fish instead of giving me fish: Foreign development aid and 
employment in Africa. Journal of World Development Sustainability. Volume 1, 
100032. 
World Bank World Development Indicators (2023). Excel database report on low-income 
Sub-Saharan Africa: Ethiopia. Washington DC. USA.  
World Economic Forum (2021). This is how climate change could impact the global economy. 
 
 
 
 
